--- Page 1 ---

Machine-Checked Haar Integration by Parts on Finite
SU(2)Edge Spaces: Pauli Flows and Two-Generator
Transfer
Lluis Eriksson
2 August 2026
Abstract
We formalize the finite-dimensional integration-by-parts mechanism used in local proofs of the
Makeenko–Migdal equation. For a measure-preserving real flowTt on a finite measure space, Lean
verifies differentiation under the integral from an explicit locally uniform integrable majorant and
proves
∫
Dfdµ= 0. A bounded dominated product interface then yields
∫
(Df)gdµ=−
∫
f(Dg) dµ,
and two successive applications transfer a mixed pair of generators from a density to an observable
with positive sign. These results are instantiated on normalized Haar probability measure of concrete
SU(2)and on every finite productSU(2)E, for left and right multiplication of one selected edge. To
fix the representation normalization, we construct three explicit trigonometric curves inSU(2)and
prove entrywise that their tangents at the identity areiσ1/2,iσ2/2,iσ3/2. The producer contains
30 public definitions, structures, and theorems in 519 physical lines; its audit contains no local
sorry, admit, oraxiom, and the headline results depend only onpropext, Classical.choice, and
Quot.sound. This closes the Haar integration-by-parts layer. It does not claim the full four-area
Makeenko–Migdal identity: the remaining formal inputs are the heat-density directional identity,
extended gauge invariance at a crossing, and their geometric assembly.
1 Result and claim boundary
Rigorous local proofs of the planar Makeenko–Migdal equation reduce the loop equation to finite-
dimensional operations on edge holonomies. In the edge-variable proof of Driver, Hall, and Kemp, an
alternating derivative in the four adjacent face areas is first converted into a mixed invariant gradient, and
Haar integration by parts moves the relevant derivatives from the Yang–Mills density to the observable
[1]. Their compact-surface extension uses the same local right-multiplication conventionai ↦→aiesX [2].
This paper isolates and machine-checks the analytic transfer layer. It starts above the level of a
particular heat kernel: the central theorem applies to any genuinely measure-preserving flow for which
differentiation is justified by a supplied majorant. It then descends to the concrete normalized Haar
measure of Mathlib’s matrix groupSU(2)and to arbitrary finite edge sets. Table 1 records the exact
boundary.
The central result can be stated without reference to a formalization:
On a finiteSU(2)edge space with normalized product Haar measure, any right- or left-invariant
edge generator satisfying the explicit dominated flow interface is skew-symmetric for the bilinear
integral pairingB(f,g) =
∫
fg dµ; two ordered generators can therefore be transferred from
the density to the observable with positive sign.
No invariance of an integral is postulated. Measure preservation is proved for the concrete translations,
and the equality of integrals is derived from the pushforward theorem.
2 A dominated measure-preserving flow theorem
Let( A,µ)be a measurable space with finite measure and letT : R×A→A . WriteTt(x) =T(t,x). We
do not require a global flow lawTs+t =Ts ◦Tt; the argument needs only
(Tt)∗µ=µ(t∈R), T 0 = id.(1)
1

--- Page 2 ---

Table 1: Claim ledger. “Checked” means compiled in the accompanying Lean artifact; open rows are not
introduced as hypotheses of a claimed loop equation.
Statement Status Role
Zero integral of a dominated generator along a
measure-preserving flow
Checked Abstract analytic producer
Product-rule Haar integration by parts Checked One-derivative transfer
Positive-sign transfer of two ordered generators Checked Mixed-gradient interface
Left/right single-edge flows onSU(2)E preserve product
Haar measure
Checked Edge-variable specialization
Three identity-based curves tangent toiσa/2Checked Normalization certificate
Alternating four-area derivative equals a density mixed
derivative
Open Heat-density local identity
Extended gauge invariance at a certified crossing Open Crossing-specific cancellation
Complete Makeenko–Migdal equation Open Requires the two preceding rows
Forf,D : A→C , assume thatf is integrable,D is almost everywhere strongly measurable, and there
existε>0and an integrableb:A→Rsuch that for everyxand|t|<ε,
d
ds
⏐⏐⏐⏐
s=t
f(Tsx) =D(Ttx),(2)
∥D(Ttx)∥≤b(x).(3)
Theorem 2.1(Generator integral vanishes).Under(1)–(3),
∫
A
D(x) dµ(x) = 0.(4)
Proof. Set F(t,x) =f(Ttx)and F′(t,x) =D(Ttx). The hypotheses of the dominated local differentiation
theorem for Bochner integrals follow from (2) and (3). Thus
d
dt
⏐⏐⏐⏐
t=0
∫
A
F(t,x) dµ(x) =
∫
A
D(x) dµ(x).
On the other hand, pushforward invariance gives
∫
A
f(Ttx) dµ(x) =
∫
A
f(x) d((Tt)∗µ)(x) =
∫
A
f(x) dµ(x).
The left side is constant int, so its derivative is zero. Lean verifies both derivatives and identifies them
using uniqueness of the derivative.
The formal theorem is stronger than an “invariant integral” interface: its input is aMeasurePreserving
map, and the invariant integral is an internal consequence. It also makes the analytic burden visible. A
merely pointwise derivative is not enough; the majorant in (3) is part of the theorem’s public data.
3 Product-rule integration by parts
For reusable applications, the artifact packages the assumptions for two functions in a structure
D(µ,T;f,g,Df,Dg).
It contains a common positive radius, four nonnegative constant bounds, almost-everywhere strong
measurability of f,g,Df,Dg , local uniform norm bounds alongTt, and the two pointwise derivative
identities. Constant bounds suffice because the measure is finite; in the concrete applications it is a
probability measure.
Theorem 3.1(Dominated integration by parts).Assume(1)andD(µ,T;f,g,Df,Dg). Then
∫
A
Df(x)g(x) dµ(x) =−
∫
A
f(x)Dg(x) dµ(x).(5)
2

--- Page 3 ---

Proof. Apply Theorem 2.1 toh= fg. The product rule givesDh= (Df)g+ f(Dg). The four constant
bounds inDproduce the integrable majorant
C=B DfBg +BfBDg.
The same data separately prove integrability of(Df)g and f(Dg), so the Bochner integral splits over the
sum. Rearranging the resulting zero-sum identity gives (5).
The ordering in (5) is retained even though the scalar codomain isC; this makes the interface
compatible with later noncommutative extensions. Equation(5) is a skew-symmetry statement for the
bilinear pairingB(f,g) =
∫
fgdµ, not a claim about adjointness for the Hermitian pairing
∫
fgdµ.
3.1 Two ordered generators
Let T(1),T(2) be two measure-preserving flows. Name the derivatives of a densityρ by D2ρ,D1D2ρ, and
those of an observablefbyD 1f,D2D1f. No commutation theorem is assumed between the flows.
Theorem 3.2(Two-generator transfer).If the dominated pair interfaces needed for the two indicated
applications of Theorem 3.1 hold, then
∫
A
(D1D2ρ)fdµ=
∫
A
ρ(D2D1f) dµ.(6)
Proof.The first integration by parts gives
∫
(D1D2ρ)f=−
∫
(D2ρ)(D1f).
The second gives ∫
(D2ρ)(D1f) =−
∫
ρ(D2D1f).
The signs cancel. The formal statement namesD1D2ρ and D2D1f separately, so it cannot silently use
commutativity of mixed derivatives.
This two-step theorem is the exact sign pattern used when a mixed derivative is transferred from a
Yang–Mills density to a crossing observable.
4 FiniteSU(2)edge configurations
Let Ebe a finite type of oriented edge coordinates and equipSU(2)E with normalized product Haar
measureµ E
H. For an edgee∈Eandh∈SU(2), define the single-edge multiplier
me,h(j) =
{
h, j=e,
1, j̸=e. (7)
Given a curveγ:R→SU(2), define
Le,γ(t,U) =me,γ(t)U,(8)
Re,γ(t,U) =Um e,γ(t).(9)
Multiplication is pointwise onSU(2)E.
Theorem 4.1(Single-edge Haar invariance).For every finiteE, everye∈E , every curveγ, and every
t∈R, both maps in(8)–(9)preserveµ E
H. Ifγ(0) = 1, both maps att= 0are the identity.
Proof. The finite product of compact groups is a compact group, and its normalized Haar probability
measure is invariant under left and right multiplication. Apply those library theorems to the concrete
group elementme,γ(t). The identity statement follows coordinatewise from (7).
Combining Theorems 3.1, 3.2, and 4.1 gives compiled left- and right-generator integration by parts on
every finite edge space, plus the concrete right-right two-generator transfer
∫
SU(2)E
(D1D2ρ)(U)f(U) dµE
H(U) =
∫
SU(2)E
ρ(U)(D2D1f)(U) dµE
H(U).(10)
The right convention matches the invariant derivatives used in the compact surface formulation of
Driver–Gabriel–Hall–Kemp [2].
3

--- Page 4 ---

5 Pauli normalization certificates
An abstract curve would leave the normalization of the Lie algebra generator external. The artifact
therefore constructs three explicit curves. Putc(t) =cos(t/2)and s(t) =sin(t/2). In the fundamental
representation,
γX(t) =
(c(t)is(t)
is(t)c(t)
)
, X= iσ1
2 =
(0i/2
i/2 0
)
,(11)
γY(t) =
(
c(t)s(t)
−s(t)c(t)
)
, Y= iσ2
2 =
(
0 1/2
−1/2 0
)
,(12)
γZ(t) =
(c(t) +is(t) 0
0c(t)−is(t)
)
, Z= iσ3
2 =
(i/2 0
0−i/2
)
.(13)
Theorem 5.1(Certified Pauli tangents).Each γa(t)lies in concrete SU(2), satisfiesγa(0) = 1, and for
alli,j∈{0,1},
d
dt
⏐⏐⏐⏐
t=0
(γa(t))ij = (Aa)ij,(A X,AY,AZ) = (X,Y,Z).(14)
Proof. Each curve is built through the previously checked equivalence betweenSU(2)and the unit sphere
in C2. The identitycos2(t/2) +sin2(t/2) = 1discharges membership in the sphere. Lean then expands
the four matrix entries, performs all twelve scalar derivative calculations, and verifies the conjugation
signs in the lower row. In particular, the factor1/2is proved rather than inferred from notation.
The same Pauli matrices were used in the companion trace–skein artifact, where their quadratic
Casimir and Fierz contraction were checked. Theorem 5.1 now proves that those matrices are the actual
infinitesimal generators of concrete Haar-preserving edge flows.
6 How this enters the local loop equation
For a crossing with four adjacent faces, the local Makeenko–Migdal operator is the alternating area
derivative
∂t1 −∂t2 +∂t3 −∂t4 .(15)
Driver–Hall–Kemp prove that, under extended gauge invariance, applying(15) to the local Yang–Mills
integral yields the negative of a mixed invariant-gradient integral [1, Theorem 2.6]. Their local proof
then uses Haar integration by parts to move derivatives from the density to the observable. The certified
dependency chain is shown in Figure 1.
four-face heat-density
directional identity
open
finite-edge Haar IBP
and double transfer
this paper
Pauli/Fierz
trace–skein closure
checked companion
extended gauge
invariance
from certified crossing
open
Figure 1: The present result closes the analytic transfer layer but does not collapse the open producers on
its left into a claimed theorem.
Theorem 3.2 exactly certifies the two minus signs contributed by the two integrations by parts.
Theorem 5.1 fixes the invariant directions that subsequently enter the Fierz contraction. What remains is
not “integration by parts” in disguise: one must still prove that the alternating area derivative of the
concrete four-face density is the named mixed generator and that extended gauge invariance combines the
incident edges with the required signs. Neither statement is assumed here.
4

--- Page 5 ---

7 Formal architecture and audit
The new artifact consists of one 519-line producer and one 44-line audit module. The producer exposes 30
top-level declarations: one structure, 11 definitions, and 18 theorems. Table 2 lists the headline map.
Table 2: Paper statements and exact Lean declarations.
Paper statement Lean declaration
Theorem 2.1integral_generator_eq_zero_of_measurePreserving_flow
Dominated pair interfaceDominatedFlowPair
Theorem 3.1integral_generator_mul_eq_neg_integral_mul_generator
Theorem 3.2integral_two_generators_transfer
Theorem 4.1measurePreserving_su2EdgeLeftFlow,
measurePreserving_su2EdgeRightFlow
Equation (10)integral_su2Edge_two_rightGenerators_transfer
Theorem 5.1hasDerivAt_su2PauliXCurve_entry,...Y...,...Z...
The public shape of the central declarations is:
theorem integral_generator_mul_eq_neg_integral_mul_generator
{mu : Measure Alpha} [IsFiniteMeasure mu]
(T : Real -> Alpha -> Alpha)
(hT : forall t, MeasurePreserving (T t) mu mu)
(hT_zero : forall x, T 0 x = x)
(f g Df Dg : Alpha -> Complex)
(P : DominatedFlowPair mu T f g Df Dg) :
(integral fun x => Df x * g x) =
-(integral fun x => f x * Dg x)
theorem integral_two_generators_transfer ... :
(integral fun x => D1D2rho x * f x) =
integral fun x => rho x * D2D1f x
The displayed code shortens measure annotations and binders only for print; the audit transcript records
the complete elaborated types.
The axiom audit prints, for all headline results,
depends on axioms: [propext, Classical.choice, Quot.sound]
These are standard logical dependencies inherited from Mathlib. A separate placeholder scan covers both
new modules and rejects any occurrence ofsorry,admit, oraxiom.
8 Prior art and formalization delta
Finite-dimensional integration by parts on compact groups is classical. The novel mathematical identity is
not claimed here. Driver, Hall, and Kemp give three rigorous local proofs of the planar Makeenko–Migdal
equation and state the mixed-gradient formula under extended gauge invariance [1]. Driver, Gabriel, Hall,
and Kemp extend the local equation to compact surfaces and explicitly formulate invariant derivatives
through right multiplication of edge variables [2]. Driver’s functional-integral account also emphasizes
that the previous rigorous proofs are finite-dimensional integration-by-parts arguments [3]. Recent work
studies passage from discrete loop equations to the continuum [4].
The exact formalization delta is the simultaneous presence of:
1. differentiation of an invariant integral derived fromMeasurePreserving, not supplied as an equality
field;
2. an explicit locally uniform integrable majorant for the generator;
3. a reusable bounded product interface and proved integrability of both terms in the product rule;
4. ordered two-generator transfer without assuming commutation;
5. concrete left and right translations on arbitrary finiteSU(2)edge products; and
6. concreteSU(2)curves with all three Pauli tangents checked entrywise.
5

--- Page 6 ---

Mathlib supplies the measure theory, Bochner integration, compact-group Haar measure, and differentiation
infrastructure. We do not make a priority claim for proof assistants; an exhaustive cross-prover survey
would be needed for that.
9 Limitations and migration note
Limitations.The theorem uses explicit bounded dominated-flow data. It does not yet derive those
bounds automatically from smoothness and compactness, nor does it build a general Lie derivative or
Laplace–Beltrami operator. The Pauli curves are certified entrywise at zero; the artifact does not need or
claim a global matrix-exponential theorem. Most importantly, it does not prove the heat-density identity
that turns(15) into the appropriate mixed edge derivative, nor the extended gauge invariance arising from
a crossing. Consequently this paper must not be cited as a complete formal proof of the Makeenko–Migdal
equation.
Migration note.This is a new sequel, not a replacement. The previously submitted positive-area
evolution paper remains the analytic source for differentiating the infinite class heat kernel. The trace–
skein paper remains the algebraic source for the Pauli/Fierz contraction. The present paper supplies the
integration-by-parts bridge between those layers. Until public ai.viXra identifiers are assigned, the two
companions should be described as submitted manuscripts, not published records.
10 Conclusion
The finite-edge Haar transfer mechanism needed by local loop equations is now machine checked. Measure
preservation plus a dominated derivative gives a zero integrated generator; the product rule gives skew-
symmetry for the bilinear integral pairing; a second application transfers two ordered derivatives with
positive sign. The result holds on every finite product of concreteSU(2)Haar spaces, on either side of a
selected edge, and the three Pauli normalizations are certified by explicit group-valued curves.
This closes a genuine missing layer without overstating the endpoint. The remaining route to a complete
formal local Makeenko–Migdal equation is now sharply localized: connect the alternating four-area heat
derivative to the mixed edge generator, prove the required extended gauge invariance from crossing
geometry, and compose those producers with the present transfer and the existing trace–skein closure.
A Reproduction protocol
The exact source archive pins Leanv4.29.0-rc6and Mathlib commit
07642720480157414db592fa85b626dafb71355b.
From the archive root:
lake update
lake exe cache get
lake build Lean2dYangMills.SU2HaarIntegrationByParts
lake env lean Lean2dYangMills/AuditSU2HaarIntegrationByParts.lean
The supplied wrapperverify-su2-haar-ibp.ps1 performs both compilations, the two-file placeholder
scan, and the exact public-declaration count. The release manifest records SHA-256 values for the
manuscript, source, archive, audit transcript, and verification script. The authorized publication route
accepts only the PDF; the source archive is therefore a direct-review artifact and is not represented as
public until a separate public route exists.
References
[1] B. K. Driver, B. C. Hall, and T. Kemp,Three proofs of the Makeenko–Migdal equation for Yang–Mills theory on the
plane, Communications in Mathematical Physics 351 (2017), 741–774; arXiv:1601.06283.
[2] B. K. Driver, F. Gabriel, B. C. Hall, and T. Kemp,The Makeenko–Migdal equation for Yang–Mills theory on compact
surfaces, Communications in Mathematical Physics 352 (2017), 967–978; arXiv:1602.03905.
[3] B. K. Driver,A Functional Integral Approaches to the Makeenko–Migdal Equations, arXiv:1709.04041 (2017; rev.
2019).
[4] H. Shen, S. A. Smith, and R. Zhu,Makeenko–Migdal equations for 2D Yang–Mills: from lattice to continuum,
arXiv:2412.15422 (2024).
6
