Lossless Calibration Is Stored Memory:
A T opological McMillan-Degree and Wigner–Smith Law
for Passive Quantum Networks
Lluis Eriksson
13 September 2026
Private corrected candidate; parent 10 August 2026
Abstract
How many internal state coordinates in a specified rational realization are required to trans-
mit prescribed quantum noise channels without loss while suppressing all signal directions
elsewhere? W e synthesize classical degree and phase-volume mechanisms into an architecture-
independent protected signal/loss formulation for finite rational inner networks. Let a causal
rational inner scattering matrix S have McMillan degree n, signal block G, and complementary
loss block C. At distinct regular boundary frequencies ζj, suppose that G(ζj) is isometric on
a kj-dimensional input subspace. If G is a strict contraction at one other boundary frequency ,
then X
j
kj ≤ n.
Indeed, every lossless direction lies in ker C(ζj); a nonzero maximal minor of C therefore has a
zero of multiplicity at least kj. Exterior powers of a minimal Blaschke–Potapov factorization
show that no minor can have more than n zeros. The same factorization yields the exact
topological delay identity
1
2π
Z π
−π
tr Q(θ) dθ = deg McM S = n, Q = −iS∗∂θS ⪰ 0.
Here θ is the unit-circle/sample-delay coordinate; a physical continuous-frequency interpreta-
tion requires a specified frequency map. Thus lossless calibration multiplicity is bounded by
integrated Wigner–Smith delay and forces peak trace delay at least P
j kj. The bound is at-
tained by a 2m-port family with M prescribed roots of unity . A Rouché version preserves
complex zero counts in disjoint pole-free closed regions for rational inner perturbed transfers
holomorphic on those regions and satisfying a strict contour margin for the same loss minor,
while an explicit counterexample shows why pointwise approximate calibration alone cannot
imply a degree bound. Applied to a previously constructed irreducible six-port reservoir filter,
the law counts 3S calibration zeros and proves that its degree 3S +6 lies within six states of the
optimum among finite rational inner completions with the same exact calibration data and a
strict stop, not merely among reducing comparators. Its determinant gives an exact trace-delay
spectrum whose integral equals 3S + 6 and whose peak is exponential. Under the specified sta-
tionary weak-coupling Markov model, the rate interpretation counts P
j kj nodewise preserved
input dimensions at distinct frequencies. Numerical degree entries are analytic formula values,
not computed minimal realizations; quadrature and root audits test the explicit family . Sources,
current corrections and dated executions are distinguished in the accompanying package.
Keywords: rational inner networks; McMillan degree; Wigner–Smith time delay; passive quantum
reservoirs; Blaschke–Potapov factorization; transmission zeros.
1 The question and the answer
Passive filtering is attractive in quantum reservoir engineering because it can reshape a bath without
continuous active control. It is nevertheless not resource-free: a sharply selective passive response
1

is stored in internal modes and long dwell times. Previous work established this trade only for a
particular scalar all-pass mechanism inside an irreducible multichannel construction [ 1]. That left
the main architectural loophole open: could a completely different passive MIMO realization obey
the same lossless calibrations with much less memory?
The answer is no for causal finite-dimensional rational inner networks. The obstruction is
topological rather than metric. Exact transmission makes a complementary loss minor vanish. A
rational inner transfer of McMillan degree n can supply at most n zeros to any one minor. The
winding of its determinant is the same integer n, and the corresponding phase derivative is the
trace of the Wigner–Smith lifetime matrix. Consequently
lossless calibration charge ≤ McMillan degree = integrated Wigner–Smith memory . (1)
The ingredients surrounding ( 1) are classical. McMillan degree originated in finite passive-
network realization theory [ 2]; rational lossless matrices admit finite Blaschke–Potapov products
[3, 4]; and the lifetime matrix goes back to Wigner and Smith [ 5, 6]. T angential interpolation
and degree-constrained MIMO interpolation are also mature subjects [ 7, 8, 9]. Our contribution
is an explicit synthesis connecting lossless directional calibration of a protected signal block to a
topological degree and lifetime budget of every passive completion, including multiplicity , sharpness
and a robust analytic certificate. W e do not claim a new factorization theorem or a new definition
of time delay .
The result advances a resource-boundary programme developed across three earlier manuscripts.
The first framed a Heisenberg cut through coherence maintenance costs [ 10]; the second showed a
finite-degree irreducible/reducible MIMO separation [ 11]; the third embedded that separation in
a passive quantum reservoir and exposed a scalar dwell-time price [ 1]. Here the comparator class
disappears: the lower bound applies to every rational inner architecture.
Contributions.
1. A calibration-charge theorem counts independent lossless directions, including several direc-
tions at the same frequency .
2. A self-contained exterior-power proof bounds every minor by the full network’s McMillan
degree.
3. An exact Wigner–Smith sum rule turns the algebraic count into an integrated and peak
passive-memory lower bound.
4. A 2m-port family saturates the charge, integrated-trace and peak-trace inequalities for arbi-
trary positive integers m, M. It does not saturate the largest-proper-delay bound.
5. A Rouché certificate preserves the count under passive analytic perturbations; a degree-one
example proves that sampled approximate calibration alone is insuﬀicient.
6. The irreducible reservoir family is re-audited with all3S calibration zeros. Its degree is 3S+6,
within an additive six states of the universal optimum, and its delay integral and peak are
computed exactly .
2 Passive transfer model
W e use the unit-disc convention. Let S : D → CN×N be a rational inner function: it is rational
and analytic in D, has no pole at the boundary points under discussion, and satisfies
S(ζ)∗S(ζ) = IN , ζ ∈ T. (2)
Pure delays zq are causal in this convention. A minimal state-space realization has dimension
n = deg McM S. F or square rational inner functions this integer also equals the degree, or boundary
winding, of the scalar inner function det S.
2

A fixed continuous-frequency convention and its state count. F or a half-plane interpre-
tation choose κ > 0 and a rotation ϕ so that −eiϕ is none of the finitely prescribed calibration or
stop nodes, and set
zκ(s) = eiϕ κ − s
κ + s, Ξ(s) = S(zκ(s)), ℜs > 0. (3)
The map sends the right half-plane into D; the rational transfer Ξ is proper and stable, with
unitary imaginary-axis values. An invertible Möbius substitution preserves McMillan degree, so
degMcM Ξ = n. Use Laplace transfer Ξ(s) with an e−iωt harmonic, hence s = −iω and θ =
ϕ + 2 arctan( ω/κ) modulo 2π. The chain rule gives
Qω = −iΞ(−iω)∗ d
dωΞ(−iω) = 2κ
κ2 + ω2 Q(θ), 1
2π
Z
R
tr Qω dω = n. (4)
Here Qω has time units when ω and κ have inverse-time units; the dimensionless peak bound is
not a fixed bound in seconds independent of this chosen map.
The physical mode interpretation additionally requires an annihilation-only passive realization
Ξ(s) = Dc + Cc(sI − Ac)−1Bc, A c = −iΩ − 1
2 C∗
c Cc, B c = −C∗
c Dc, D ∗
c Dc = I, Ω = Ω ∗.
F or a minimal realization of this form, n is the number of complex annihilation coordinates (oscil-
lator modes), or 2n real quadratures; extra unobservable modes do not count toward the minimal
transfer degree. These are the passive realization conditions and minimality convention of [ 12,
§§3.1–3.3, Theorem 3.5]. The algebraic theorem does not assert that a particular laboratory de-
vice has been synthesized or that an arbitrary propagation-delay implementation has this finite
mode count. F or the discrete-time interpretation, n instead counts minimal sample-delay state co-
ordinates. All physical mode claims here are conditional on the specified finite passive realization,
with all loss ports included.
Select m signal input columns, p protected output rows and the remaining ℓ = N −p loss-output
rows. With irrelevant blocks suppressed, write
S(z) =
G(z) ∗
C(z) ∗

, G (z) ∈ Cp×m, C (z) ∈ Cℓ×m. (5)
Column unitarity gives, on every regular boundary point,
G(ζ)∗G(ζ) + C(ζ)∗C(ζ) = Im. (6)
This equality is the only quantum-network identity used in the degree obstruction. It is also the
standard preservation law behind passive linear quantum input–output models [ 13, 12, 14].
Definition 2.1 (Calibration charge). At a regular point ζ ∈ T, the lossless calibration space is
Eζ := ker(Im − G(ζ)∗G(ζ)) , k ζ := dim Eζ.
F or distinct calibration nodes ζ1, . . . , ζM , their total charge is K := PM
j=1 kζj .
The definition asks only for norm preservation. It does not require a specified output phase, a
common invariant channel, reciprocity or commutativity . F rom (6),
Eζ = ker C(ζ). (7)
A strict stop is one regular boundary point ζ∗ ∈ T for which ∥G(ζ∗)∥op < 1. At such a point ( 6)
makes C(ζ∗)∗C(ζ∗) positive definite. In particular ℓ ≥ m and C(ζ∗) has full column rank.
3

3 The minor-degree mechanism
T wo elementary lemmas carry the proof. W e include details because they make the result easy to
audit and expose exactly where rationality enters.
Lemma 3.1 (Local nullity consumes determinant multiplicity) . Let A(z) be an m × m matrix
holomorphic near z0. If dim ker A(z0) ≥ k, then either det A ≡ 0 or
ordz0 det A ≥ k. (8)
Proof. Choose a constant invertible input change of basis whose first k columns span a subspace
of ker A(z0). The first k columns of the transformed matrix vanish at z0, so every entry in those
columns is divisible by z−z0. Multilinearity of the determinant supplies at leastk factors. Constant
basis changes alter the determinant only by a nonzero constant.
Lemma 3.2 (Every minor inherits the full McMillan budget) . Let S be an N × N rational inner
function of McMil lan degree n. Every nonzero r ×r minor of S has at most n finite zeros, counted
with multiplicity and restricted to points where the minor is regular.
Proof. A minimal finite Blaschke–Potapov factorization has exactly n rank-one factors. Precisely ,
use [ 4, Theorem 3.1, square case Eq. (3.5)]. That reference permits either pole region and writes
elementary scalar factors (1 − ¯az)/(z − a). Apply its Schur-stable exterior-disc form to S#(z) =
S(1/¯z)∗ and paraconjugate back: product order reverses, McMillan degree is preserved, and the
scalar factors become ba(z) = ( z − a)/(1 − ¯az) with |a| < 1 (including a = 0 ). This supplies
a minimal product of exactly n rank-one factors in our analytic-disc convention, rather than an
arbitrary mixed-pole product in which cancellations may occur:
S(z) = U
nY
q=1

IN +
 
baq (z) − 1

uqu∗
q

, b a(z) = z − a
1 − ¯az , |a| < 1, (9)
where U is constant unitary and ∥uq∥ = 1 . F actors with aq = 0 include integer delays.
Every r × r minor is an entry of the exterior-power matrix Vr S. On Vr CN , a factor in ( 9)
becomes
I +
 
baq (z) − 1

Pq,
where Pq is the orthogonal projection onto wedges containing uq. Thus every entry of the product
has a common scalar denominator dividing Qn
q=1(1 − ¯aqz) and a numerator of degree at most n.
Cancellation can only lower the degree. A nonzero entry therefore has at most n finite zeros.
The exterior-power argument is one proof choice, not an essential new degree principle. Classical
realization theory supplies a direct alternative. W rite a disc realization with n states as T(z) =
D + zCr(I − zA)−1B. F or row and column sets I, J of equal size,
det TI,J (z) =
det
I − zA −zBJ
(Cr)I DI,J

det(I − zA) .
Only the top n rows of the numerator depend on z, each linearly , so its degree is at most n.
Cancellation can only lower it. This is the same minor budget. The block determinant step is
the Schur-complement identity for the classical Rosenbrock system matrix: see [ 15, Section 1,
Eq. (1) and its following transfer-function formula], with T = I − zA, U = zBJ , V = ( Cr)I and
W = DI,J in that reference’s notation. The displayed row-degree argument supplies the minor
corollary directly; we do not attribute a separately named calibration theorem to that reference.
The classical zero/pole degree-sum framework is reviewed in [ 15, Theorem 1 and Section 3]. The
passive completion identity supplies the subsequent interpretation as calibration charge; neither
scalar zero counting nor system-matrix theory is new here.
4

4 Universal calibration-charge theorem
The zero-budget and phase-volume mechanisms are classical and shared with the spectral-routing
formulation [ 16]. The contribution here is their protected signal/loss formulation, nodewise cali-
bration data, qualified rational-inner robustness, saturation examples and six-port application; no
new factorization or independent-priority claim is made.
Theorem 4.1 (Lossless calibration is stored degree). Let S be a causal N×N rational inner transfer
of McMil lan degreen, partitioned as in (5). Let ζ1, . . . , ζM ∈ T be distinct regular calibration nodes
with charges kj = dim Eζj . If there exists a regular strict-stop point ζ∗ ∈ T satisfying ∥G(ζ∗)∥op < 1,
then
K :=
MX
j=1
kj ≤ degMcM S = n. (10)
Proof. At the strict stop, C(ζ∗) has full column rank. Select m of its rows whose square submatrix
CI(ζ∗) has nonzero determinant, and put f(z) = det CI(z). Hence f ̸≡ 0.
At node ζj, ( 7) gives Eζj ⊆ ker CI(ζj), so dim ker CI(ζj) ≥ kj. By Lemma 3.1, f has a zero
of multiplicity at least kj there. The nodes are distinct, whence f has at least K zeros counting
multiplicity . It is an m × m minor of S, so Lemma 3.2 gives K ≤ n.
Remark 4.2 (Why the strict stop is necessary) . If G is isometric everywhere, then C ≡ 0 and every
loss minor vanishes identically; a constant unitary signal route has degree zero and arbitrarily many
lossless “calibrations. ” One strict stop certifies that the chosen minor is not the zero function. The
theorem is therefore a selectivity law, not a charge for transparent wiring.
Remark 4.3 (No hidden architecture comparator) . The proof permits arbitrary frequency-
dependent channel mixing, arbitrary constant unitary pre- and post-processing, nonreciprocal
inner networks, and any number ℓ ≥ m of loss outputs. It compares neither with a reducing class
nor with a fixed numerator denominator bidegree. This is the precise sense in which Theorem 4.1
closes the main loophole left by the earlier architecture separation [ 1].
5 T opological Wigner–Smith memory law
F orζ = e iθ define the dimensionless Wigner–Smith matrix
Q(θ) := −i S(eiθ)∗ d
dθS(eiθ). (11)
In a physical frequency variable ω, multiplication by dθ/dω restores units of time. The sign in
(11) matches the analytic-disc convention; changing to a z−1 engineering convention reverses the
orientation and requires the corresponding sign change.
Theorem 5.1 (Degree is Wigner–Smith phase volume). F or a causal rational innerS of McMil lan
degree n,
Q(θ) ⪰ 0, 1
2π
Z π
−π
tr Q(θ) dθ = wind T det S = n. (12)
Proof. F or a single factor Eq = I + ( baq − 1)uqu∗
q in ( 9), direct differentiation gives a rank-one
positive delay
QEq (θ) = 1 − |aq|2
|eiθ − aq|2 uqu∗
q, (13)
whose trace integrates to 2π. If A and B are inner, the product rule is
QAB = B∗QAB + QB.
5

Positivity therefore survives the entire Potapov product, and trace invariance under unitary con-
jugation makes the integrated traces add to 2πn.
Equivalently , cyclicity of trace gives tr Q = −i ∂θ log det S. Each rank-one factor has determi-
nant baq , so det S winds n times.
Combining the two theorems yields the operational statement.
Corollary 5.2 (Universal memory budget) . Under the hypotheses of Theorem 4.1,
K ≤ n = 1
2π
Z π
−π
tr Q(θ) dθ ≤ sup
θ
tr Q(θ). (14)
Moreover,
sup
θ
λmax(Q(θ)) ≥ K
N . (15)
Consequently a uniform proper-delay cap Q(θ) ⪯ DIN permits at most K ≤ ND units of lossless
calibration charge.
The lower bound concerns phase volume, not only a single resonant peak. A network may
distribute the required memory broadly over frequency or concentrate it into sharp long-lived
modes, but it cannot remove the integral. This distinction complements the earlier scalar stopband
theorem, which forced an exponentially high peak for one particular suppression mechanism [ 1].
6 Sharpness at every dimension
The coeﬀicient one in ( 10) cannot be improved.
Proposition 6.1 (Exact saturation). F or every pair of integersm, M ≥ 1 there is a causal 2m-port
rational inner transfer with M distinct nodes, charge m at each node, a perfect stop, and
degMcM S = mM =
MX
j=1
kj. (16)
Its Wigner–Smith trace is the constant mM, so the integrated bound and the peak-trace bound are
also equalities.
Proof. Let
Hm = 1√
2
Im Im
Im −Im

, Sm,M (z) = Hm diag(Im, zM Im)Hm.
Then
G(z) = 1 + zM
2 Im, C (z) = 1 − zM
2 Im. (17)
At every Mth root of unity , C = 0 and kj = m. At every solution of zM = −1, G = 0 . Since
det S = zmM , its McMillan degree is mM. Constant conjugation of diag(0, MIm) gives Q, so
tr Q = mM.
This saturating family is reducible and deliberately simple. It proves that irreducibility is not
needed for the universal resource law. Irreducibility becomes useful for attaining strong stopband
performance under richer directional calibrations, as revisited in Section 8. Here the proper-delay
eigenvalues are 0 and M, each m times, whereas K/N = M/2. Thus ( 15) is not saturated. No
equality for arbitrary prescribed node geometry or arbitrary port partitions is claimed.
7 What robustness is possible—and what is not
Exact boundary equalities are experimentally idealized. T wo different notions of robustness must
be separated.
6

7.1 Analytic zero-count stability
Let f0 be the nonzero loss minor selected in the proof of Theorem 4.1. Choose positively oriented
Jordan contours Γ1, . . . , ΓM whose closed interiors are pairwise disjoint. Require f0 to be holomor-
phic on a neighborhood of every closed interior, with no zero on the contour, and let the interior
of Γj contain ζj with multiplicity at least kj. In particular, reference poles are excluded from the
entire enclosed regions, not just their boundaries.
Theorem 7.1 (Rouché-stable calibration charge) . Under the preceding pole-free, disjoint-region
hypotheses, let eS be another rational inner transfer holomorphic on a neighborhood of every closed
interior, and let ef denote the same loss minor. If
sup
z∈Γj
| ef(z) − f0(z)| < inf
z∈Γj
|f0(z)| (j = 1 , . . . , M ), (18)
then
degMcM eS ≥
MX
j=1
kj. (19)
More general ly the right side may be replaced by the total number of zeros of f0 inside the contours,
counted with multiplicity.
Proof. Rouché’s theorem [ 17] gives the same zero count for f0 and ef inside each contour. Their
interiors are disjoint, so ef has at least P
j kj zeros. Apply Lemma 3.2 to eS.
The reference holomorphy condition cannot be dropped. F or f0 = 3( z −1)/(2(z −2)), obtained
from the two-port completion with b1/2(z) = ( z − 1/2)/(1 − z/2), the calibration charge is one.
The constant swap completion has ef = 1 and degree zero. On |z| = 10 , sup |1 − f0| ≤ 11/16 <
9/8 ≤ inf |f0|, but the reference pole z = 2 is enclosed; meromorphic zero-minus-pole counting does
not give the asserted degree bound. The corrected assumptions exclude this example. Likewise,
disjoint curves alone can be nested; disjoint interiors prevent double counts.
Preserved complex zeros need not stay on the real-frequency boundary . Consequently this
theorem does not guarantee nearby exact lossless boundary calibrations after perturbation.
This is a robust model certificate: it uses a rational fit or analytic component model on small
complex-frequency contours. It does not pretend that off-axis transfer values are direct labora-
tory observables. In practice, one fits a passive rational model to real-frequency scattering data,
propagates parameter uncertainty to ( 18), and verifies the zero count on the model family .
7.2 Why pointwise approximate calibration is insuﬀicient
Proposition 7.2 (No count from unseparated approximate samples) . Fix any positive integer M
and tolerance δ > 0. There is a degree-one two-port rational inner transfer, M distinct boundary
nodes, and a perfect stop such that the signal magnitude at every node is at least 1 − δ.
Proof. F or0 < r < 1 set
br(z) = z − r
1 − rz , Sr(z) = H1 diag(1, br(z))H1, G r(z) = 1 + br(z)
2 .
This network has degree one and Gr(−1) = 0 . Continuity and Gr(1) = 1 give an open boundary
arc around 1 on which |Gr| ≥ 1 − δ. Select any M distinct nodes in that arc.
Thus a theorem depending only on the number of approximate samples is false: the nodes
may oversample one degree-one pass window. V alid finite-tolerance bounds need additional
information—for example node separation plus a derivative budget, or the analytic contour
margin in Theorem 7.1 . This no-go prevents a common but serious overinterpretation of exact
root counts.
7

8 Near-optimal irreducible quantum reservoir filter
W e now apply the universal law to the explicit six-port family of [ 1]. Every use of irreducibility
here is conditional on the cited companion theorem; we do not give a new self-contained irreducibil-
ity proof. The imported result is as follows: the theorem entitled “Passive irreducible/reducing
separation” in that reference, item 4, proves it whenever the stated stop bound is below one. More
precisely , its Section 4 theorem “Passive irreducible/reducing separation”, item 4, uses 3(S − 1)
selected nodes in the open pass arc |θ| < π/ 6. Its node-count lemma selects S − 1 solutions of
Bg(z) = 1 per group from the same scalar arms and phases used below. These are a subset of the
S roots per group counted here, with the same signatures vg,z = U(z)eg and delayed calibration.
The companion’s stop envelope on 5π/6 ≤ |θ| ≤ π is εS = ( πS/6 + 1/2)e−9S/20 < 1 for every S ≥ 5:
it is below one at S = 5 , and its logarithmic derivative is 1/(S + 3/π) − 9/20 < 0 thereafter. Thus
its item 4 applies to this family . That argument uses the selected full-spark subset and a rational
bidegree ceiling; the present 3S charge counts all roots and does not assume full spark of the entire
enlarged set. Neither irreducibility nor that architectural comparison is needed for the universal
calibration-charge bound proved here. The purpose is not to repeat its architectural separation,
but to answer a question that paper could not: how far is its internal dimension from the best
arbitrary passive architecture?
Fix α = 9 /20 and an integer S ≥ 5, and put
rS = 1 − e−αS, b r(z) = z − r
1 − rz , B S(z) = ηSbrS (z)S, (20)
where ηS = 1 for odd S and −1 for even S. Hence BS(−1) = −1. Let ϕg = ( g − 1)(1 − rS) for
g = 0 , 1, 2 and Bg = e iϕg BS. With the 3 × 3 F ourier matrixF, define
U(z) = F diag(1, z, z2)F∗, U rev(z) = F diag(z2, z, 1)F∗. (21)
The balanced interferometers and the full network are
Wg(z) = 1
2
1 + Bg(z) 1 − Bg(z)
1 − Bg(z) 1 + Bg(z)

, SS = diag( U, I3) W diag(Urev, I3), (22)
where W places the three Wg on signal/loss port pairs. Every factor is inner. The signal and loss
blocks from the three signal inputs are
GS(z) = U(z) diag
1 + B0(z)
2 , 1 + B1(z)
2 , 1 + B2(z)
2

Urev(z), (23)
CS(z) = diag
1 − B0(z)
2 , 1 − B1(z)
2 , 1 − B2(z)
2

Urev(z). (24)
Each scalar degree-S inner function Bg takes the value one at exactly S simple points of T. The
three root sets are disjoint because the phases ϕg are distinct modulo 2π. At a root z of Bg −1, the
input direction vg,z = U(z)eg is lossless and obeys GS(z)vg,z = z2vg,z. Hence the total calibration
charge is
KS = 3 S. (25)
At z = −1 every |1 + Bg(−1)|/2 < 1, so the signal block is strictly contractive. The universal
theorem already forces degree at least 3S.
The realized degree is exact, not an entrywise upper bound. Since det U = det Urev = z3 and
det Wg = Bg,
det SS(z) = z6
2Y
g=0
Bg(z), det CS(z) = z3
2Y
g=0
1 − Bg(z)
2 . (26)
Therefore
degMcM SS = 3 S + 6 = KS + 6. (27)
8

The six-state overhead is exactly the two frequency-dependent mixers. Thus the same device
previously proved superior to every calibrated reducing comparator is now certified within an
additive six states of the best possible finite rational inner network of any architecture with the
same exact calibration nodes/directions and a strict stop.
The determinant also gives the complete trace delay:
tr QS(θ) = 6 + 3 S 1 − r2
S
1 − 2rS cos θ + r2
S
. (28)
Consequently
1
2π
Z π
−π
tr QS dθ = 3 S + 6, max
θ
tr QS(θ) = 6 + 3 S 1 + rS
1 − rS
= 6 + 3 S(2eαS − 1). (29)
The area is the compulsory topological memory . The exponentially high peak is the additional price
of concentrating the scalar all-pass phases sharply enough to achieve exponential stop suppression.
5 10 15
Blaschke order S
20
30
40
50
60count / degree
calibration charge K
McMillan degree n
six-state overhead
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
frequency θ
101
102
103
104
105
106
tr Q(θ)
S = 5
S = 9
S = 19
Figure 1: Left: the explicit irreducible six-port construction has calibration charge KS = 3 S and
analytically derived McMillan degree nS = 3 S+6, a constant six-state overhead above the universal
lower bound. Right: the phase volume, fixed by the degree of each network and increasing from 21
to 63 across the shown family , becomes increasingly concentrated into a high Wigner–Smith peak
as rS approaches the unit circle. The frequency windows differ by S so the peak shapes remain
visible.
9 F rom scattering memory to decoherence selectivity
The theorem is a network constraint. The following quantum-rate interpretation is conditional on
a stationary linear bath-transfer model and on the weak-coupling assumptions needed to use its
spectral matrix in a Markov generator. Let the positive signal-input spectral matrix obey
j−Im ⪯ J(ω) ⪯ j+Im, 0 < j− ≤ j+ < ∞, (30)
and define the signal contribution to a Kossakowski matrix by
ΓG(ω) = G(eiθ(ω))J(ω)G(eiθ(ω))∗. (31)
F or completeness, let b(t) be a stationary column of input bath operators, let J be the F ourier
transform of its correlation matrix ⟨b(t)b(0)∗⟩, and suppose the selected output is the linear filter
y = h ∗b with F ourier transferG. Inserting both convolutions in ⟨y(t)y(0)∗⟩ and using stationarity
9

gives the congruence (31). Independent auxiliary inputs contribute separate positive spectral terms.
The displayed matrix accounts only for the signal input. Its use as a rate matrix at system Bohr
frequencies requires a specified system-bath coupling and the weak-coupling limit [ 18]; it is not
derived from boundary unitarity alone. Classical correlated-noise filter functions [ 19] are related
context, not a derivation of the quantum-port interface.
F or any normalized lossless inputv ∈ ker(I −G∗G), define the output direction w = Gv. Then
∥w∥ = 1 and G∗w = v, even when G is rectangular. Consequently
w∗ΓGw = v∗Jv ≥ j−. (32)
This is a statement in the corresponding output direction, not an identification of input and output
spaces. In the square six-port example, Gv = z2v, so it also yields the same-direction statement.
At a stop where ∥G∥op ≤ ε,
∥ΓG∥op ≤ j+ε2. (33)
The spectral-rate contrast is therefore squared at the Kossakowski level. The new statement is the
compulsory resource behind preserving many pass directions:
K =
MX
j=1
dim Eζj ≤ degMcM S = 1
2π
Z
tr Q. (34)
The count is the sum of input-subspace dimensions at the distinct calibration frequencies of Def-
inition 2.1, not a single frequency-independent dimension of global directions. Its interpretation
as a statement about rates remains conditional on the stationary weak-coupling Markov model
specified above; the underlying degree bound is a deterministic transfer-matrix result.
Auxiliary vacuum ports remain physical channels. They can add a baseline to an observed
Ramsey decay , as accounted for explicitly in [1]; Theorem 4.1 neither removes nor hides that floor.
What it proves is orthogonal: regardless of how the passive network is realized, exact preservation
of K selected spectral directions together with any strict all-direction stop requires at least K
internal-state degrees and the same amount of integrated delay .
This is also the precise connection to the Heisenberg-cut resource viewpoint [ 10]. Active main-
tenance can pay in work and entropy production; a passive architecture can avoid that continuous
drive, but its selective boundary conditions are stored as dynamical memory . No universal con-
version from McMillan degree to joules is asserted: such a conversion depends on linewidths,
temperature, fabrication and initialization. The universal statement is the topological state/delay
count.
10 Reproducible certificate and adversarial checks
The proof of Theorems 4.1 and 5.1 is analytic. Computation audits the explicit family and deliber-
ately probes the fragile parts of the argument. All reported degree entries are values of the proved
formulas; they are not independent numerical minimal-realization or Smith–McMillan calculations.
The public repository [ 20] runs the following checks.
1. It generates all 3S closed-form calibration nodes for S ∈ { 5, 7, 9, 11, 15, 19} and evaluates
det CS there.
2. It records the analytically derived degree formulas 3S + 6 and 3S + 3 for the full network and
selected loss minor. These fields are not independent symbolic degree or minimal-realization
computations.
3. Adaptive quadrature checks (2π)−1 R
tr QS = 3 S + 6, including the narrow S = 19 resonance.
4. It checks strict nontriviality of the loss minor at the stop z = −1.
10

5. At S = 5 , it perturbs the input and output beam-splitter angles while preserving passivity .
Fifteen disjoint contours are constructed around the reference calibration zeros. The sampled
maximum Rouché ratio is below one, and an independent polynomial root count finds one
perturbed zero in every contour.
6. The historical standalone verifier checks some of these conditions but accepts malformed
ledgers, including duplicate orders and empty root inventories. The corrected package sup-
plies a separate validator with explicit configuration, finite-value, cardinality and formula
checks; its mutation tests and actual executions are preserved separately .
7. As an adversarial check of the exterior-power step, 128 seeded random six-port Potapov
products test minors of every size from one through six and factor counts up to nine. After
multiplication by the single product denominator, every minor is fitted within the predicted
polynomial degree budget and checked on an independent complex grid.
S charge KS degree nS 1
2π
R
tr QS max tr QS |det CS(−1)|
5 15 21 21.0000000000 2.7563 × 102 0.9972253
9 27 33 33.0000000000 3.0785 × 103 0.9999241
19 57 63 62.9999999909 5.8896 × 105 0.99999999
T able 1:Selected rows from the machine-readable certificate. The degree column contains analytic
formula values, not computed minimal realizations. The small S = 19 quadrature discrepancy is
below 10−8 relative error despite the exponentially narrow delay peak.
F or the passive perturbation audit, the beam-splitter rotation is R(η)H diag(1, Bg)HR(ξ) in
each signal/loss pair. The run uses angular perturbation 2 × 10−4 radians. Across the fifteen
contours the largest sampled ratio
maxΓj | ef − f0|
minΓj |f0| (35)
is 0.04512; every independently computed perturbed numerator has exactly one root in each cor-
responding contour. This numerical audit illustrates Theorem 7.1 ; the theorem itself does not
depend on grid sampling.
F rom a complete checkout of the scientific source checkpoint, the historical numerical replay is:
python research/calibration_memory_certificate.py
python verification/verify_calibration_memory.py
The generator emits results/calibration_memory/certificate.json. Its historical figure uses
the symbol M for calibration charge. The current figure changes only that legend to K using the
separately supplied presentation overlay .
F or the corrected fixed-ledger check, start in the current candidate package and give a new
output directory outside it:
python -B reproduce.py --output ../calibration-replay
This top-level script copies the historical scientific tree and corrected overlay into scratch, regen-
erates the ledger, runs the validator, records environment versions, timestamps, commands and
failures in RESULT.json, and checks preserved input hashes. It refuses an existing output or one
inside the package and disables Python bytecode writes. It neither installs dependencies nor over-
writes a preceding replay . The deposited PDF is identified by its exact hash. An ordinary T ectonic
rebuild may reproduce the rendered pages while changing PDF creation metadata and document
identifiers, hence its SHA-256. W e do not claim byte-deterministic recompilation without fixing
those fields.
11

The corrected verifier’s SHA-256 is bd5474fa161578b037415e4d4cbf0ee4ff4ed9d69e4bdc5d
bc9b73e2dabb214d . The overlay changes the scratch copy only; the preceding historical verifier
and ledger remain preserved. The current corrected manuscript is the package’s root paper.tex;
the checkpoint’s paper_calibration_memory/main.tex is the earlier manuscript and must not
be substituted when reproducing this PDF. The JSON file records tolerances and unrounded
values. The frozen source checkpoint is a52d6e74dba697477acf9204077a1b67ffe56dfc . The
recorded numerical environment uses NumPy 2.5.1, SciPy 1.18.0 and Matplotlib 3.11.1; actual
local execution details are supplied separately . A package that omits release assets cannot execute
the complete repository release gate. This is not evidence that the assets are absent publicly . The
random-minor campaign does not replace Lemma 3.2; it is a falsification attempt against coding
mistakes and an accidental rn-rather-than-n denominator count.
Evidence consistency and historical scope. The separate corrected validator additionally
checks |det CS(−1)| = cos 2(e−0.45S/2) and the consistency bound rmax ≤ ∆max/fmin for the re-
ported Rouché ratio, with the zero-perturbation case treated consistently . These are elementary
fixed-ledger checks, not continuous contour certification or authentication of how the numbers
were produced. A new recorded validator run accepts three distinct preserved ledger inputs and
rejects 32 malformed variants. The inputs are the exact historical scientific ledger, a coordinator
generator replay , and a separately attributed referee generator replay; testing those inputs is not
another execution of the generator. An earlier supplied control record labelled two identical inputs
as current and preserved-original. It demonstrates two accepted calls on the same bytes; that
original record is retained with this correction, without claiming two distinct inputs.
The historical ledger’s prose phrase “nontrivial rational inner completion” does not replace
the full-rank loss condition, equivalently the regular boundary strict stop used in the proof. Non-
triviality alone is insuﬀicient. Historical scientific files are preserved unchanged with this scope
note. The preceding figure used M for calibration charge; the current figure uses K. The original
scientific generator is unchanged, and the single-label presentation overlay is separately versioned.
Source references below identify a full repository commit; release-tag URLs by themselves are not
immutable source identifiers.
11 Relation to prior theories and novelty boundary
It is useful to separate the present statement from nearby classical results.
T angential interpolation. General and bitangential interpolation theories ask for a rational
matrix matching prescribed directional values, often with complexity constraints [ 7, 9]. Model-
reduction interpolation matches moments or tangential transfer data [8]. The particular calibration
formulation below identifies the complementary loss block of a unitary completion, turns exact
norm saturation into transmission-zero multiplicity , and links that count to lifetime phase volume.
This presentation does not establish that the bound was unavailable as a consequence of classical
realization and transmission-zero theory .
Blaschke–Potapov factorization. Potapov products describe rational inner matrices and ex-
pose their degree [ 3, 4]. They are used in passive quantum networks to separate trapped modes
from propagation delays [ 21]. W e use that theorem, through exterior powers, as a sharp budget
for every loss minor ; the factorization itself is not new.
Wigner–Smith theory . The lifetime matrix and total scattering phase are classical [ 5, 6]. The
new content is not the trace-log-determinant identity . It is the lower bound on that trace integral
from directional lossless calibrations of a protected block, plus its sharp realization and passive-
network consequence.
12

Earlier architecture separation. The previous paper proved that constant-channel reducing
comparators cannot match an irreducible construction at fixed bidegree, and obtained a scalar peak-
delay price [ 1]. The current theorem neither assumes a reducing comparator nor uses full-spark
signatures. It certifies a minimum full-network realization degree for every passive architecture.
The two results are complementary: one prices architectural simplification; the other prices lossless
selectivity itself.
Related spectral-routing formulation. The same author’s Exact Memory of Finite Spectral
Routing T ables [16], Lemma 2.1 and Corollary 4.2, already presents the compressed-minor zero
budget and integrated Wigner–Smith degree law. Its data fix one inputk-plane and prescribe target
output planes at the nodes; its direct-sum occupancy theorem also supplies an exact compiler. Here
the lossless input subspaces may vary with the node, only their norms in a protected output block
are prescribed, and one all-direction strict stop selects a nonzero complementary-loss minor. W e do
not compute the minimum for arbitrary prescribed calibration data. The minor-degree mechanism,
determinant multiplicity and delay conversion are shared, not new here. The contribution is
this protected signal/loss formulation, its qualified robustness and saturation examples, and the
additive-six application. The routing manuscript is dated 11 August 2026 and its cited AIRR
version 13 August 2026; the archived parent of this paper is dated 10 August 2026. This comparison
does not adjudicate priority between those manuscripts. No independent-priority claim is made.
The exact additional proposition is Theorem 4.1 : for arbitrary node-varying input subspaces Ej,
isometry of the protected block on Ej, together with one strict stop, forces P
j dim Ej ≤ n without
fixing one input plane or specifying target output planes at the nodes. Those data are not the
fixed-plane routing-table hypotheses of the cited occupancy theorem. Its compressed-minor lemma
remains shared prior machinery; we do not claim a stronger degree lemma or an exact optimizer
for arbitrary Ej. The six-port consequence is the explicitly stated 3S ≤ nmin ≤ 3S + 6 for the
matching calibration and stop constraints.
12 Limitations and escape routes
Limitation 12.1 (Finite rational memory) . The theorem excludes singular-inner factors, ideal in-
commensurate distributed delays and genuinely infinite-dimensional continua. A finite rational
approximation has a finite McMillan degree and is covered; the convergence of such approxima-
tions is a separate problem. When z is a sample-delay variable, the degree counts discrete-time
realization coordinates. Substitution z = exp(i ωτ ) does not make a finite sample-delay model
a finite-dimensional continuous-time oscillator realization. Conformal half-plane realizations and
traveling-field delay networks have distinct physical interpretations [ 21].
Limitation 12.2 (Exact versus robust calibration) . Exact point calibration gives the clean topo-
logical charge. Robustness is available when an analytic contour margin is certified. Pointwise
approximate samples alone do not suﬀice, by Proposition 7.2. Deriving optimal noisy-data bounds
from separated real-frequency samples and a measured delay cap remains open.
Limitation 12.3 (Passivity). Active gain, time variation and measurement-based feedback fall out-
side rational inner scattering. Such resources may reduce passive memory , but they reintroduce
pumping, control or entropy costs rather than refuting the passive theorem.
Limitation 12.4 (Degree is not energy). McMillan degree and Wigner–Smith delay are architecture-
independent memory coordinates. They do not fix fabrication volume, stored energy or thermo-
dynamic work without a component model. The paper therefore does not derive a numerical
Landauer cost from ( 10).
Limitation 12.5 (Markov interface). The decoherence interpretation uses a weak-coupling spectral
generator. Strong coupling, non-Markovian initial correlations and driven nonequilibrium baths
need a larger dynamical model. Increasing memory across S does not provide a uniform Markov
13

approximation automatically . The scattering theorem itself remains a deterministic statement
about the passive transfer.
These limitations suggest concrete next questions rather than cosmetic extensions: a real-axis
noisy-data analogue with optimal separation dependence; an infinite-dimensional version formu-
lated through spectral shift; and a component-level lower bound converting delay phase volume
into stored energy or physical volume under linewidth constraints.
13 Conclusion
Perfect selective transmission cannot be specified for free in a passive finite-dimensional network.
Each independent lossless direction forces a zero of the complementary loss block; local nullity
counts its multiplicity; and a single strict stop selects a nonzero minor whose zero budget cannot
exceed the full McMillan degree. The same integer is the winding of the scattering determinant
and the integrated Wigner–Smith delay in the unit-circle coordinate; physical frequency requires
an explicit map. Hence lossless calibration is stored memory .
The inequality is coeﬀicient-sharp. Its zero-count robustness holds for rational inner perturbed
transfers under the stated pole-free, disjoint-region and strict contour-margin hypotheses. A count
based only on unstructured approximate samples is false. These three facts matter for a referee-
proof statement. F or the irreducible six-port reservoir construction, it upgrades an architecture-
relative separation into a universal near-optimality theorem: 3S calibrated directions require at
least 3S states, while the construction uses 3S + 6 . Under the stated weak-coupling Markov
interpretation, its exponential decoherence selectivity is therefore not achieved by hiding complexity
in an unpriced channel transformation. The unavoidable memory is visible both as topological
degree and as Wigner–Smith delay .
A Multiplicity at a matrix zero
W e record a coordinate-free variant of Lemma3.1. Let A(z) : X → Y be an analytic family between
two m-dimensional complex spaces. If dim ker A(z0) = k, select a decomposition X = E ⊕E⊥ with
E ⊆ ker A(z0) and dim E = k. In adapted bases,
A(z) =
(z − z0)A11(z) A12(z)
(z − z0)A21(z) A22(z)

,
where the first block column has width k. Every term in the Leibniz formula for det A selects one
entry from each of those columns and hence contains (z − z0)k. This proves ordz0 det A ≥ k even
when the rank defect is nongeneric. Equality holds for a transversal zero; a higher-order degeneracy
only strengthens Theorem 4.1.
F or the rectangular loss matrix C : Cm → Cℓ, the strict stop gives a set I of m output rows
with CI(ζ∗) invertible. At every calibration node, Eζ ⊆ ker C ⊆ ker CI, so the same argument
applies to this single minor at all nodes. No frequency-dependent choice of rows is made.
B Exterior powers and the degree-one contribution
F or completeness, ifE(z) = I + (b(z) − 1)P with P = uu∗ rank one, then CN = span {u} ⊕ u⊥. Its
rth exterior power splits as
r^
CN =
 
u ∧
r−1^
u⊥
!
⊕
r^
u⊥.
On the first summand Vr E acts by b(z); on the second it acts by one. Hence
r^
E(z) = I + (b(z) − 1)Π
14

for a constant projection Π. Its entries have scalar numerator and denominator degree at most
one. A product of n such matrices has a common denominator of degree at most n and entry
numerators of degree at most n. The coordinates of Vr S in the standard wedge basis are exactly
the signed r × r minors of S.
This also explains why the degree of a square inner matrix equals the degree of its determinant.
F orr = N, the exterior space is one-dimensional and each rank-one factor contributes precisely
baq :
det S(z) = det U
nY
q=1
baq (z).
C Certificate schema and numerical conditioning
The machine-readable ledger stores, for every S, the calibration multiplicity , full-network degree,
loss-minor degree, loss-zero residual, strict-stop determinant, quadrature result, quadrature error
estimate and peak trace delay . Closed-form phase inversion is used for calibration nodes; high-
degree polynomial root finding is intentionally avoided in the scaling table because clustered roots
near the unit circle are ill-conditioned.
Polynomial roots are used only in the S = 5 perturbation audit, where they serve as an
independent check on the contour calculation. The reference contours have minimum radius 2.11×
10−4; the smallest sampled |f0| is 2.45 × 10−5 and the largest sampled perturbation is 1.79 × 10−6.
The global maximum of the per-contour ratio is smaller than the ratio of these two global extrema
and is recorded as 0.04512. The JSON values, rather than the rounded manuscript values, are
normative for the reproducibility test. The same ledger records the random Potapov seed, all
tested compound ranks and the worst independent-grid interpolation residual.
References
[1] Lluis Eriksson. Architecture-dependent decoherence suppression in passive quantum networks.
GitHub release, 2026. Source checkpoint at https://github.com/lluiseriksson/finite-s
ample-spectral-certificates/blob/a52d6e74dba697477acf9204077a1b67ffe56dfc/pa
per_quantum_reservoir/main.tex.
[2] Brockway McMillan. Introduction to formal realizability theory—i. Bel l System T echnical
Journal, 31(2):217–279, 1952.
[3] V. P . Potapov. The multiplicative structure of J-contractive matrix functions. T rudy
Moskovskogo Matematicheskogo Obshchestva , 4:125–236, 1955. In Russian; English transla-
tion in American Mathematical Society T ranslations, Series 2, V ol. 15.
[4] Daniel Alpay , Palle Jorgensen, and Izchak Lewkowicz. Characterizations of rectangular (para)-
unitary rational functions. Opuscula Mathematica, 36(6):695–716, 2016.
[5] Eugene P . Wigner. Lower limit for the energy derivative of the scattering phase shift.Physical
Review, 98:145–147, 1955.
[6] F elix T. Smith. Lifetime matrix in collision theory . Physical Review, 118:349–356, 1960.
[7] Joseph A. Ball and Jeongook Kang. Matrix polynomial solutions of tangential Lagrange–
Sylvester interpolation conditions of low McMillan degree. Linear Algebra and its Applications,
137–138:699–746, 1990.
[8] Kyle A. Gallivan, An V andendorpe, and Paul V an Dooren. Model reduction of MIMO systems
via tangential interpolation. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications , 26(2):328–
349, 2004.
15

[9] Joseph A. Ball and Vladimir Bolotnikov. The bitangential matrix Nevanlinna–Pick interpo-
lation problem revisited. In Indefinite Inner Product Spaces, Schur Analysis, and Differen-
tial Equations , volume 263 of Operator Theory: Advances and Applications , pages 107–161.
Birkhauser, 2018.
[10] Lluis Eriksson. The heisenberg cut as a resource boundary: An operational outlook from
coherence maintenance costs. ai.viXra.org, 2512.0064v2, 2026.
[11] Lluis Eriksson. Irreducible channel mixing and exponential calibration laws for matrix-
polynomial and linear-phase MIMO FIR filters. GitHub release, 2026. Source checkpoint
at https://github.com/lluiseriksson/finite-sample-spectral-certificates/blob
/a52d6e74dba697477acf9204077a1b67ffe56dfc/paper_noncommuting/main.tex.
[12] John E. Gough and Guofeng Zhang. On realization theory of quantum linear systems. Auto-
matica, 59:139–151, 2015.
[13] John Gough and Matthew R. James. The series product and its application to quantum
feedforward and feedback networks. IEEE T ransactions on Automatic Control, 54(11):2530–
2544, 2009.
[14] Hendra I. Nurdin, Symeon Grivopoulos, and Ian R. Petersen. The transfer function of generic
linear quantum stochastic systems has a pure cascade realization. Automatica, 69:324–333,
2016.
[15] F roilán Dopico, María del Carmen Quintana, and Paul V an Dooren. Linear system matrices
of rational transfer functions. In Realization and Model Reduction of Dynamical Systems .
Springer, 2022.
[16] Lluis Eriksson. Exact memory of finite spectral routing tables: The direct-sum occupancy
law and its singular strata. AIRR.SCIENCE, ARR-2026-52B6MSS1W197W9T2, v1, 2026.
Manuscript dated 11 August 2026; AIRR version published 13 August 2026.
[17] Lars V. Ahlfors. Complex Analysis. McGraw–Hill, New Y ork, 3 edition, 1979.
[18] E. B. Davies. Markovian master equations. Communications in Mathematical Physics, 39:91–
110, 1974.
[19] Pascal Cerfontaine, T obias Hangleiter, and Hendrik Bluhm. Filter functions for quantum
processes under correlated noise. Physical Review Letters, 127:170403, 2021.
[20] Lluis Eriksson. T opological calibration-memory law: Source and reproducible certificate.
GitHub repository , 2026. Public source at https://github.com/lluiseriksson/finit
e-sample-spectral-certificates/tree/a52d6e74dba697477acf9204077a1b67ffe56dfc .
[21] Gil T abak and Hideo Mabuchi. T rapped modes in linear quantum stochastic networks with
delays. EPJ Quantum T echnology, 3:3, 2016.
16
