Lluis Eriksson | ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH | ARR v1
1
A finite geometry of low-rank three-list
Weyl probes in ternary dimensions
Lluis Eriksson - 6 September 2026.
ARR v1 - ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH. 6 September 2026.
Abstract
For the single cyclic Weyl basis in dimension 
 
 we classify every reduced probe
state of rank strictly below 
 that permits perfect channel identification with lists of at
most three labels. Every such state belongs to a fixed commuting algebra with nine
equal-dimensional character cells. The states form exactly 150 disjoint relative interiors:
twelve vertices, sixty-six edges and seventy-two triangles, indexed by lines in the affine
plane of order three. Their ranks, spectra, unique projector decompositions and minimum
numbers of three-sparse positive squares are explicit. Exactly twelve states in this stratum
permit two labels. The result gives 
 and 
 so exact-rank
list complexity need not decrease with rank. A three-term example at rank 
 leaves the
fixed commuting algebra, showing that the cutoff for the structural classification is sharp.
The proof uses the previously established prime-power trinomial rank reduction and
standard character averaging; the new step is a rigidity and positive-sum classification. A
standard-library verifier checks all 4,095 nonempty line subsets and exact matrices in
dimensions 9, 27 and 81.
1. Setting and main statement
Let 
 
 and 
 The Weyl sparsity 
 is the
number of nonzero coefficients of  in this basis, indexed by 
 All statements concern
this fixed cyclic representation. Replacing it with a tensor product of  qutrit Pauli bases
changes the sparsity problem.
Consider one use of the 
 channels 
 a pure entangled probe, and an arbitrary
final POVM. A perfect list decoder always reports a set containing the true label. Write
 for the reduced density matrices of probes permitting lists of at most  labels. Write
 for the minimum list size at a fixed reduced state, and 
 for its minimum
over states of rank exactly 
Throughout the main theorem, 
 and 
 Put
(1)
These operators commute, have order three, and generate nine distinct Weyl labels. Their
joint eigenspaces 
 defined by 
 and 
 have dimension 
 for every


Lluis Eriksson | ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH | ARR v1
2
For an affine line 
 with 
 represented by one of
 define
(2)
There are twelve distinct 
 all of rank 
 A triangle of lines will mean three pairwise
nonparallel affine lines with no common intersection point.
Theorem A (complete low-rank state classification). Every 
 with 
has exactly one expression
(3)
where  is one of the following line families. Conversely, every state in this table belongs to
 and has the stated rank.
Family 
Number of families
Rank
Minimum number 
 of
three-sparse squares
One line
12
1
Two nonparallel lines
54
2
Two parallel lines
12
1
A triangle of lines
72
3
The representation is unique among positive convex combinations of the twelve states 
after zero coefficients are removed. The scalar 
 counts nonzero factors in 
 with
 It does not count the channel labels on a measurement outcome or the
minimum number of POVM outcomes.
The relative interiors in the table are disjoint. Together with their boundary faces they
form a finite simplicial complex of twelve vertices, sixty-six edges and seventy-two
triangles. This is a description of the low-rank part of 
 not of its full convex body.
Theorem B (list size, rank creation and a four-label family). In the stratum of
Theorem A, exactly the twelve midpoints of the parallel edges permit two labels. Their
states are
(4)
Their minimum list size is two. Every other state in Theorem A has minimum list size three.
In particular,
(5)
Theorem C (sharp cutoff). There is a three-sparse square of rank 
 that does not
belong to the linear span of the nine character projectors 
 Thus 
 cannot be
included in the universal conclusion that all feasible states lie in the algebra of (1).


Lluis Eriksson | ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH | ARR v1
3
Theorems A-C concern exact zeros, exact Schmidt rank and finite-dimensional pure probes.
They make no claim about approximate decoding, arbitrary composite dimensions or the
rank strata at and above 
2. Sparse positive squares and physical decoding
We recall the operational reduction, including its normalization. This is the Weyl
specialization used in the preceding work, consistent with the general learning-width and
factor-width correspondence of Johnston, Lovitz, Russo and Sikora, Lemma 9 and Corollary
11 [2].
Lemma 1 (covariant factorization). A density matrix  belongs to 
 if and only if
(6)
We fix the vectorization convention
Thus the partial trace over the channel factor of 
 is 
 where the transpose is
taken in the displayed ancilla basis.
Proof. Write 
 with 
 of full column rank, and use the probe 
 Spectrally
refine the measurement effects into vectors 
 An outcome amplitude has the form
 Perfect decoding forces these amplitudes to vanish outside the reported list.
Weyl trace orthogonality identifies their support, up to label inversion and phases, with the
Weyl support of 
 Taking a partial trace of the POVM normalization gives
 transposing yields 
 Hence 
 proves (6).
Conversely, positivity in (6) implies 
 Put 
 Then 
 and
 The twirl identity is
Consequently Weyl twirling gives the POVM
(7)
On outcome 
 report 
 This has at most  labels and contains
every label with nonzero outcome probability. QED.
A positive sum satisfies 
 In particular every factor has range
contained in the range of the sum. This elementary consequence of positivity will enforce
the rigidity of all summands at once.


Lluis Eriksson | ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH | ARR v1
4
3. The rank threshold forces an order-three algebra
For clarity, the needed part of the earlier trinomial reduction [1] is proved here. Character
averaging, cyclic Weyl-pair normal forms and their central characters are established tools;
see [3,4].
If commuting phased Weyls generate a label group 
 of order 
 every joint character
space has dimension 
 Indeed, after dividing by one simultaneous character the
operators form an honest representation of 
 Its character projector is 
All nonidentity Weyl terms have trace zero, so every character projector has trace 
 In
particular every character occurs and  divides 
Lemma 2 (noncommuting ternary trinomials). A genuine trinomial 
 with
 and noncommuting phased Weyls 
 in cyclic dimension 
 has nullity at most
two.
Proof. Let 
 be the labels and let the scalar commutator have order 
 The
labels 
 generate the central subgroup 
 This is precisely the radical of the
commutator pairing on 
 a combination 
 commutes with both generators
exactly when  divides 
We verify 
 Let  be the minimum 3-adic coordinate valuation across 
 A
determinant-one change of label coordinates, obtained from a Bezout identity for a
primitive vector, puts one generator at 
 and the other at 
 with 
 dividing 
The determinant has valuation 
 so  has valuation 
 Subtracting 
 times
 from 
 makes the two generators of  coordinate axes. Their orders are 
 and
 whose product is 
Consequently each joint eigenspace of 
 has dimension 
 If their eigenvalues there
are 
 a cyclic eigenbasis for  puts  into a weighted cyclic shift. On this block,
(8)
The determinant has only its diagonal and full-cycle permutation contributions. The kernel
recurrence divides only by the nonzero shift weights and by 
 so a singular block has
nullity exactly one. The pairs 
 are distinct and of unit modulus. The equation in (8)
has at most two such pairs: it is the intersection of two distinct circles after one variable is
eliminated, and 
 are nonzero. At most two blocks are singular. QED.
Lemma 3 (square rigidity below 
). If 
 
 and 
 then
(9)
for two distinct parallel lines 
 A coefficient may vanish. Conversely every matrix in (9)
is a square of a matrix with at most three Weyl terms.
Proof. Right-multiply  by the adjoint of one supported Weyl. This preserves 
 rank
and sparsity, and places the identity in the relative support. One-term matrices are
invertible.
A singular two-term matrix is proportional to 
 for a phased Weyl  having eigenvalue
one. If its label order is 
 the kernel has dimension 
 Here 
 is a positive power of


Lluis Eriksson | ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH | ARR v1
5
three. The strict inequality 
 forces 
 Thus its square belongs to the
order-three algebra and kills one of its three eigenspaces.
For a genuine trinomial, Lemma 2 excludes noncommuting relative support, since
 for 
 If the relative support commutes, let its group have order 
 The
three coefficients are nonzero, so the circle argument permits at most two zero characters.
If 
 this gives rank at least 
 Three distinct relative labels and 
therefore force 
The normalized factor is a polynomial 
 in an order-three phased Weyl.
Every order-three label is in 
 so its eigenspaces are the three parallel lines in (2).
The polynomial has at least one zero eigenvalue because it is singular. Its square is
therefore a nonnegative combination of at most two of these orthogonal line projectors,
proving (9). This establishes the shape of the square, not merely its possible rank.
Conversely, 
 satisfies 
 Since 
 are parallel, both
projectors belong to the same three-dimensional span of 
 so 
 QED.
The joint cells in (1) and the identities in (2) follow from the same character averaging
argument: 
 commute because  divides 
 when 
 They generate a group of
order nine. Every nonzero order-three direction has precisely three eigenspaces, yielding
four directions and twelve distinct line projectors.
4. Geometry, uniqueness and spectra
Lemma 4 (small unions of affine lines). A nonempty family of distinct lines in 
 has a
union of fewer than seven points exactly when it is a single line, a pair of lines, or a triangle
of lines. There are twelve singletons, twelve parallel pairs, fifty-four nonparallel pairs and
seventy-two triangles. Each resulting support contains exactly the lines in that family, and
each line has a point belonging to no other line of the family.
Proof. A single line has three points. Two parallel lines have six; two nonparallel lines have
five. Three lines containing a parallel pair have at least seven points. Three distinct
directions through one point also have seven points. Three pairwise nonparallel,
nonconcurrent lines have six points, since their three pairwise intersections are distinct.
It remains to rule out a fourth line hidden in a six-point union. If the complement of six
points is a line, exactly its two parallel companions avoid it. If the three complement points
are noncollinear, they lie on nine distinct lines in total: each lies on four lines and their
three pairwise joining lines are the only duplications. Exactly three of the twelve lines
avoid the complement. Those three have no parallel pair and are nonconcurrent, since
their union is contained in six points. Thus every six-point support contains precisely either
its two parallel lines or its three triangle lines. A five-point union of two crossing lines
contains no further line: a different line parallel to a constituent has at most one point on
the union, while any other line has at most two.
There are 
 parallel pairs and 
 nonparallel pairs. Triangles are in
bijection with the noncollinear triples of complement points, of which there are
 A line in a triangle has two distinct intersection points and one private point.
The assertion about private points in the remaining cases is immediate. QED.


Lluis Eriksson | ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH | ARR v1
6
Proof of Theorem A. Take a factorization (6). Each factor has rank at most 
so Lemma 3 expands its square into line projectors with nonnegative coefficients. Merge
repeated lines and normalize the coefficients using 
 This gives (3). Since all cell
values are nonnegative, the range of the sum is exactly the union of its lines, with rank 
times its number of points. Lemma 4 gives all listed families and ranks.
Conversely, every 
 is itself three-sparse, so any convex combination in (3) has a
factorization (6), for example 
 For a parallel pair, Lemma 3 combines its
two terms into one factor.
To prove uniqueness, the range of  determines the support of its nonzero character cells.
Any positive line representation can use only lines contained in that support. Lemma 4 says
these are exactly the indicated lines. The value on a private cell of  is 
 and therefore
determines its coefficient. This proves uniqueness even against decompositions initially
allowing all twelve projectors.
For the minimum number of squares, Lemma 3 forces every individual square to use at
most two parallel lines. In a crossing pair or triangle, no two available lines are parallel, so
each nonzero factor uses only one line. Their respective minimum counts are two and
three. A singleton or parallel pair admits one factor, which is minimal. QED.
The spectra can be read directly from the cell values. The following lists all positive
eigenvalues, with repetitions indicated; coincident values have their multiplicities added.
State
Positive eigenvalues
 with multiplicity 
Crossing pair with weights 
 each displayed entry repeated 
 times
Parallel pair with weights 
 and 
 each repeated 
 times
Triangle with weights 
 each displayed entry repeated 
times
Example (unequal triangle weights). Take 
 
 and
 in 
 with weights 
 respectively. Their private cells are
 The six nonzero cell values of 
 are
Each cell has dimension 
 the other three cells are zero. The rank is 
 and both the
minimum list size and the minimum number of three-sparse squares are three. The
repeated value 
 does not obstruct recovering the weights from the three private cells.
Thus every feasible state below 
 is scalar on each cell, and all such states commute
with one another. The triangle weights can be recovered from their three private cells even
when some eigenvalues coincide. This is an operator-level statement; the unordered
spectrum alone need not determine which lines carry the state.


Lluis Eriksson | ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH | ARR v1
7
5. Exact list sizes and rank nonmonotonicity
Proof of Theorem B. A nonzero one-sparse matrix is invertible, so every proper-rank state
requires at least two labels. For a two-sparse factor below 
 the proof of Lemma 3
forces an order-three singular binomial. After scaling it is 
 with 
 Its two
nonzero squared eigenvalues are both 
 Thus
(10)
Every nonzero factor has rank 
 If a two-list state has rank below 
 Theorem A
forces its rank to equal 
 Every factor must then have the same range as the state.
Equation (10) makes every square proportional to the same range projector. The
normalized state is exactly (4). Conversely (10) supplies a two-sparse factor for each of the
twelve such states. They are the equal-weight parallel pairs. All remaining states in
Theorem A already admit three labels and cannot admit fewer.
Any crossing pair therefore has minimum list size three and rank 
 proving the first
equality in (5). Theorem A excludes rank 
 for three labels. For four-label attainment,
use the commuting order-three Weyls in (1) and set
(11)
These are four distinct Weyl labels with nonzero coefficients. On 
 the square vanishes
exactly when 
 or 
 it equals nine on the four remaining cells. Hence
(12)
The normalized state 
 and Lemma 1 prove the second equality in (5). QED.
This produces an exact-rank nonmonotonicity: 
 
 
 and 
 have minimum
list sizes three, four, three and two, respectively. The increase at 
 concerns exact rank;
it does not contradict monotonicity when rank is treated as a resource budget.
Positive summation also creates a rank unavailable to a single three-sparse factor. A
crossing mixture has corank 
 Lemma 3 shows directly that an individual factor below
 can only have rank 
 or 
 Thus rank 
 requires at least two sparse squares,
as quantified by 
Corollary 5 (dimension nine). The positive ranks admitting a perfect decoder with at
most three labels are exactly
(13)
Moreover, for exact ranks 
 the minimum list sizes are respectively
Proof. Theorem A excludes ranks one, two and four, and supplies three, five and six. The
identity, 
 and 
 supply ranks nine, eight and seven using respectively
one, two and three terms. This proves (13).
Only the lower bound of three at rank seven remains. A two-sparse factor in dimension nine
has rank six, eight or nine when nonzero. In a rank-seven positive sum only rank-six factors


Lluis Eriksson | ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH | ARR v1
8
can occur; their squares are flat complements of the twelve rank-three line projectors by
(10). If all these excluded lines agree, the sum has rank six. If two differ, their intersection
has dimension zero or one, so the common kernel of the sum has dimension at most one
and its rank is at least eight. Rank seven is impossible with two labels. The other exact
values follow from Theorem B and the proper-rank obstruction to one label. QED.
No exact minimum for ranks one and two is asserted in this corollary.
6. Sharpness of the structural cutoff
Proof of Theorem C. Put 
 and 
 The matrix
(14)
has three nonzero Weyl terms. The order-nine operator  has nine distinct eigenvalues,
each of multiplicity 
 and (14) kills exactly its eigenvalues  and 
 Thus  has rank
The coefficient of 
 in 
 is 
 There is no aliasing among the powers 
since  has order nine. But the label of 
 is 
 outside 
 Weyl basis
uniqueness therefore places 
 outside the span of the nine Weyls generated by 
equivalently outside the algebra spanned by 
 Normalization does not change this
conclusion. QED.
The restriction 
 is also essential. In dimension three, 
 do not commute, and their
order-three eigenspaces do not form nine simultaneous character cells. In fact
 is a three-list state of rank two below 
 whereas the fractions 
and 
 in the higher-power classification do not define the same cell geometry. We
therefore exclude 
 rather than applying the table outside its hypotheses.
7. Reproducibility and contribution boundary
The supplied ternary_verify.py uses only the Python standard library. Run it in a directory
containing the manuscript:
python ternary_verify.py
It writes ternary_certificate.json, with the verifier and manuscript hashes. Its arithmetic uses
exact rational pairs in 
 and integers. It checks all 4,095 nonempty subsets of the
twelve affine lines, not merely the 150 predicted low-rank families. It verifies the counts,
support uniqueness, private-cell recovery and spectral formulas. Separately it constructs
the actual cyclic Weyl matrices in dimensions 9, 27 and 81, verifies all twelve line and nine
cell projectors, every projector-pair intersection, explicit mixtures and the four-term rank-
 construction. It also checks central multiplicity arithmetic for all 6,320 ordered
distinct nonzero label pairs in dimension nine. No floating-point singular-value threshold is
used.
The infinite-dimensional-family statements rest on the proofs above. The finite enumeration
certifies the nine-point geometry and supplies exact representation checks; it does not
replace quantification over arbitrary coefficients or arbitrary 
 This replay was written by


Lluis Eriksson | ARR-2026-02AGP452839C09SH | ARR v1
9
the constructing agent and is not labeled an independent audit. Any separate internal
review must identify the precise manuscript and certificate hashes it reviewed.
The predecessor [1] established the individual prime-power rank rule and the universal
central-sector formula. It also classified a dyadic low-rank stratum. Those results and the
sparse-square/POVM reduction are antecedents, not new claims of this manuscript. The
contribution here is the complete ternary positive-sum stratum, its unique finite
decomposition, exact sparse-square length, fixed-state two/three-label distinction and the
four-label family in (5).
Affine-line character projectors and convex mixtures have established finite-phase-space
antecedents. Gross [5] and Veitch, Ferrie, Gross and Emerson [6] analyze stabilizer states
and their discrete Wigner representations. In particular, the affine-line incidence object
underlying the present nine-cell description is classical; it is not presented as a new finite
geometry or a new stabilizer representation. Our twelve operators are mutually commuting
rank-
 code projectors in the cyclic dimension-  basis. They must not be identified with
twelve noncommuting pure qutrit stabilizer projectors as operators. The new rigidity
lemma is what forces arbitrary sparse positive factorizations in this problem into that
familiar finite incidence structure.
Focused primary-source searches did not locate the exact ternary classification or the list
values in (5). This bounded search does not establish bibliographic priority. The full
higher-rank cone, exact list sizes at all ranks, quantitative stability under approximate
zeros, and possible extensions to other odd prime powers remain outside this article.
References
1. L. Eriksson, Three-term Weyl operators: central multiplicities, rank laws, and exact list decoding,
ARR-2026-0WESHW4YMM9FG8EK, version 1, 5 September 2026. Published record. The source and PDF
hashes are recorded in the accompanying reading ledger.
2. N. Johnston, B. Lovitz, V. Russo and J. Sikora, The complexity of perfect quantum state classification,
arXiv:2510.20789v1, Section 2.1, Lemma 9 and Corollary 11. Primary text.
3. V. Gheorghiu, Standard Form of Qudit Stabilizer Groups, arXiv:1101.1519, Theorem 1. Primary PDF.
4. D. Farenick, O. Ojo and S. Plosker, Universality of Weyl Unitaries, arXiv:2101.00129, Lemmas 2.1-2.2.
Primary PDF.
5. D. Gross, Hudson's Theorem for finite-dimensional quantum systems, arXiv:quant-ph/0602001; J. Math.
Phys. 47, 122107 (2006), Sections II and VII. Primary PDF.
6. V. Veitch, C. Ferrie, D. Gross and J. Emerson, Negative Quasi-Probability as a Resource for Quantum
Computation, arXiv:1201.1256; New J. Phys. 14, 113011 (2012), Section IV. Primary PDF.
Lluis Eriksson directed the research programme. OpenAI Codex assisted with conjecture screening, proof
development, exact computation, source comparison and drafting. This manuscript extends the separately
published predecessor cited above.
