--- Page 1 ---

Every Spectral Switch Costs Memory:
Sharp Robust Wigner–Smith Speed Limits
for Passive Quantum Networks
Lluis Eriksson
10 August 2026
Abstract
Exact interpolation can force the internal degree of a passive network, but laboratory
calibrations are approximate. We prove a sharp frequency-domain speed limit that needs neither
exact zeros nor analytic continuation away from the measured frequency axis. Let S(eiθ) be an
absolutely continuous unitary scattering path with positive Wigner–Smith generator
Q(θ) =−iS(e iθ)∗∂θS(eiθ)⪰0.
A fixed k-dimensional input subspace is routed approximately into one output sector at one
end of a frequency arc and into its orthogonal complement at the other. If the two amplitude
leakages areε p, εs and
α=
hπ
2 −arcsinε p −arcsinε s
i
+
,
then every such transition obeys
Z
I
trQdθ≥2kα,
Z
I
λmax(Q) dθ≥2α.
Consequently a transition across width ∆ forces peak trace delay at least 2 kα/∆ and peak
proper delay at least 2 α/∆. For disjoint arcs the costs add. If S is rational inner of McMillan
degreen,
R
T trQ= 2πn; henceMalternating pass/stop pairs imply
n≥ 2Mk
π
hπ
2 −arcsinε p −arcsinε s
i
+
.
At zero error this is n≥Mk . A 2 k-port interferometric family of degree Mk saturates the global
law exactly and saturates both local laws for every admissible error pair, proving all constants
optimal. The proof combines canonical-angle geometry on the Grassmannian with two sharp
off-diagonal inequalities for positive Wigner–Smith matrices. A measurement-error corollary
converts finite scattering tomography directly into certified degree and delay lower bounds.
Reproducible audits include 2,048 random positive matrices and 512 random Blaschke–Potapov
products.
Keywords:Wigner–Smith time delay; McMillan degree; passive quantum networks; approximate
spectral routing; Grassmannian; rational inner functions; robust interpolation.
1 The result in one picture
A passive network may direct the same input channel toward different output sectors at different
frequencies. This behavior underlies multiplexing, reservoir selection and frequency-dependent
placement of an operational system–environment boundary. The ideal specification is binary:
pass: input subspace lies in sectorA,stop: it lies in sectorB=A ⊥.
1

--- Page 2 ---

Real data only certify small leakage. The question is therefore not how many exact transmission
zeros a transfer function has, but how far itsoutput subspace must travelas frequency changes.
The answer is a geometric action law. Write X(θ) for the rank- k output subspace generated by
the chosen inputs. A pass-to-stop transition separates the endpoint subspaces by at least kα in
the trace-angular Grassmann metric. The positive Wigner–Smith matrix supplies the velocity, but
positivity makes motion expensive: at most one half of trQ can appear in the off-diagonal block
that movesX. Thus
2kα|{z}
required routing motion
≤
Z
I
trQ
| {z }
Wigner–Smith memory on the arc
.(1)
The largest eigenvalue of Q controls the same transition without the factor k. Narrow transitions
consequently require large proper delays.
The distinction from the exact calibration law in [ 1] is fundamental. That law counts zeros and
gives one unit of degree per exactly lossless direction, even when the calibrated frequencies cluster.
Approximate samples alone cannot support such a count. The present result replaces exactness
by an ordered routing pattern: approximately pass and approximately stop must alternate. It
then recovers the exact coefficient at zero error and remains quantitative at finite error, using only
boundary data.
Our contributions are:
1. a nonrational action theorem for every absolutely continuous unitary path withQ⪰0;
2. additive bounds over arbitrary disjoint frequency arcs;
3. a robust McMillan-degree corollary for rational inner networks;
4. sharp local bounds on trace delay and the largest proper delay;
5. equality constructions in every rank and at every admissible pair of leakage tolerances;
6. a tomography-to-certificate rule that explicitly propagates operator-norm measurement error;
and
7. independent numerical stress tests of both proof interfaces.
2 Setup and operational data
2.1 Scattering path and selected inputs
Let S : T→U (N) be absolutely continuous. Angles are unwrapped on intervals of R, so we write
S(θ) forS(e iθ). Define
Q(θ) =−iS(θ) ∗S′(θ).(2)
For any unitary pathQis Hermitian. Our passive monotone class assumes
Q(θ)⪰0 for almost everyθ.(3)
Every causal rational inner matrix in the disk has this property: a rank-one Blaschke–Potapov
factor contributes a positive Poisson kernel, and the product rule preserves positivity by unitary
conjugation [2, 3].
Let J : Cm →C N embed the input ports of interest, and let V : Ck →C m be an isometry. The
selected input projection in the full port space and its output frame are
P0 =JV V ∗J∗, X(θ) =S(θ)JV.(4)
2

--- Page 3 ---

Thus X(θ)∗X(θ) = Ik, and Π( θ) = X(θ)X(θ)∗ = S(θ)P0S(θ)∗ is the orthogonal projection onto
the routed output subspaceX(θ) = ranX(θ).
Split the outputs into complementary sectors with orthogonal projectionsR A, RB satisfying
RA +R B =I N , R ARB = 0.(5)
The labels may mean signal/loss, two reservoirs, two spatial ports or two readout classes. No
reciprocity, real symmetry or frequency-independent channel basis is imposed onS.
2.2 Approximate routing specifications
At a pass pointpand a stop points, suppose
∥RBX(p)∥op ≤ε p,∥R AX(s)∥op ≤ε s,0≤ε p, εs ≤1.(6)
These are amplitude leakages. Squared values are worst-case leaked power. Set
α(εp, εs) =
hπ
2 −arcsinε p −arcsinε s
i
+
.(7)
The bound becomes nontrivial precisely when the two uncertainty cones do not overlap. Equivalently,
for arcsinε p + arcsinεs < π/2, define
ρ= sin(arcsinε p + arcsinεs), α= arccosρ.(8)
3 Three geometric lemmas
The proof separates into endpoint geometry, path geometry and positivity. All three constants will
be saturated later.
Lemma 3.1(Leakage separates the endpoint subspaces).Under (5)–(6), every canonical angle
betweenX(p)andX(s)is at leastα(ε p, εs).
Proof. For unit vectors u, v∈Ck, put a = ∥RBX(p)u∥ and b = ∥RAX(s)v∥. Complementarity and
isometry give
∥RAX(p)u∥=
p
1−a 2,∥R BX(s)v∥=
p
1−b 2.
Therefore
|⟨X(p)u, X(s)v⟩| ≤
p
1−a 2 b+a
p
1−b 2
= sin(arcsina+ arcsinb)≤ρ,
whenever the angle sum is below π/2; otherwise the conclusion with α = 0 is automatic. Hence
∥X(p)∗X(s)∥op ≤ρ . The cosines of the canonical angles are the singular values of X(p)∗X(s), so
each angle is at least arccosρ=α.
For a rank-ksubspace pathX(θ), let
L1(X;I) =
Z
I
∥B(θ)∥1 dθ, L ∞(X;I) =
Z
I
∥B(θ)∥op dθ,(9)
where, in the moving frame determined byS,
B(θ) = (I−P 0)Q(θ)P0.(10)
Only this off-diagonal block changes the output subspace; the diagonal blocks rotate frames inside
the subspace and its complement.
3

--- Page 4 ---

Lemma 3.2(Grassmann distance is no larger than path length).Let β1, . . . , βk be the canonical
angles between the endpoint subspaces of an intervalI. Then
kX
j=1
βj ≤L 1(X;I),max
j
βj ≤L ∞(X;I).(11)
Proof.Differentiate Π =SP 0S∗ and useS ′ = iSQ:
Π′ = iS[Q, P0]S∗.
Relative to P0 ⊕ (I−P 0), the commutator has off-diagonal blocks B and −B∗. Thus its nonzero
infinitesimal angular velocities are the singular values of B. The symmetric gauge functions P
j βj
and maxj βj define the trace-angular and maximum-angular metrics on the Grassmann space
[4, 5]. Applying the metric triangle inequality to polygonal refinements of the path and taking the
absolutely continuous limit gives (11).
Lemma 3.3(Positive generators spend at least twice the motion).Let Q⪰ 0and B = (I−P 0)QP0.
Then
2∥B∥ 1 ≤trQ,2∥B∥ op ≤λ max(Q).(12)
Both constants are optimal.
Proof.In the decompositionP 0 ⊕(I−P 0) write
Q=
A B ∗
B D

⪰0.
Positive block factorization gives B = D1/2KA1/2 for a contraction K. Schatten H¨ older and
arithmetic–geometric mean inequalities yield
∥B∥1 ≤ ∥D1/2∥2 ∥KA1/2∥2 ≤
√
trDtrA≤ trA+ trD
2 = trQ
2 .
For the operator norm put q = λmax(Q). Since ∥Q− (q/2)I∥op ≤q/ 2 and subtracting a scalar
identity does not change the off-diagonal block,
∥B∥op =∥(I−P 0)(Q−(q/2)I)P 0∥op ≤q/2.
Equality holds forQ= (q/2)
 I−I
−I I

on two equal-dimensional sectors.
4 Sharp robust routing speed limits
Theorem 4.1(One transition costs Wigner–Smith action).Let S satisfy (3), and let an interval I
have endpointsp, ssatisfying(6). Withαfrom(7),
Z
I
trQ(θ) dθ≥2kα,
Z
I
λmax(Q(θ)) dθ≥2α. (13)
If|I|= ∆>0, then
sup
θ∈I
trQ(θ)≥ 2kα
∆ ,sup
θ∈I
λmax(Q(θ))≥ 2α
∆ . (14)
Proof. By Theorem 3.1, all k canonical endpoint angles are at least α. Hence Theorem 3.2 gives
kα≤L 1 and α≤L ∞. Integrating Theorem 3.3 proves (13). Dividing the two integral bounds by
∆ proves (14).
4

--- Page 5 ---

The orientation may be reversed: an approximate B endpoint followed by an approximate A
endpoint obeys the same result. Pairwise disjoint arcs can therefore be added without double
counting.
Theorem 4.2(Additive routing-action law).Let I1, . . . , IL be pairwise disjoint arcs. On each arc
the selected rank-k subspace changes between complementary sectors with errors εp,ℓ, εs,ℓ in either
orientation. Putα ℓ =α(ε p,ℓ, εs,ℓ). Then
Z
∪ℓIℓ
trQdθ≥2k
LX
ℓ=1
αℓ. (15)
Moreover every arc separately obeys the proper-delay bound
R
Iℓ
λmax(Q)≥2α ℓ.
Proof. Apply Theorem 4.1 on each arc and add. Disjointness is the only condition needed for
additivity.
The action law does not use rationality. Rational inner structure converts the available total
action into a finite integer. For a rational inner N×N matrix of McMillan degree n, Blaschke–
Potapov factorization gives the exact identity
1
2π
Z π
−π
trQ(θ) dθ= wind T detS= deg McM S=n.(16)
This is the multichannel Wigner–Smith phase-volume law [6, 7, 8].
Corollary 4.3(Robust degree certificate).Under the hypotheses of Theorem 4.2, if S is rational
inner of McMillan degreen, then
n≥ k
π
LX
ℓ=1
αℓ. (17)
In particular, suppose M pass points and M stop points occur in strict cyclic alternation, with
uniform errorsε p, εs. The2Mintervening arcs are disjoint, so
n≥ 2Mk
π
hπ
2 −arcsinε p −arcsinε s
i
+
. (18)
At exact routing,n≥Mk.
Remark4.4 (Why ordering replaces exactness).A degree-one interferometer can have arbitrarily
many approximate pass samples clustered near one perfect pass point and a single stop elsewhere.
Thus sample count without ordering gives no robust degree law. Alternation forces the output
subspace to complete a macroscopic excursion between every neighboring pair, which is exactly
what (15) counts.
Remark4.5 (Signed-delay extension).For a general unitary path, Q is Hermitian but need not be
positive. The same Grassmann argument still yields
Z
I
∥Q∥1 dθ≥kα,
Z
I
∥Q∥op dθ≥α.
Positivity is responsible for the factor two and for replacing absolute delay action by the topological
trace in (16).
5

--- Page 6 ---

5 Equality and optimality in every rank
Let
Hk = 1√
2
Ik Ik
Ik −Ik

, S k,M (z) =H k diag(Ik, zM Ik)Hk.(19)
This is a 2 k-port rational inner matrix. Its McMillan degree is kM and its signal/loss blocks for
the firstkinputs are
G(z) = 1 +z M
2 Ik, C(z) = 1−z M
2 Ik.(20)
Onz= e iθ its Wigner–Smith matrix is constant:
Qk,M = M
2
 Ik −Ik
−Ik Ik

,trQ k,M =kM, λ max(Qk,M ) =M.(21)
Proposition 5.1(Local finite-error equality).For every admissible εp, εs and every k, M, choose
an arc whose interferometric phaseϕ=Mθruns from
ϕp = 2 arcsinεp toϕ s =π−2 arcsinε s.
Its width is∆ = 2 α/M. The endpoint leakages equal the specified errors, and all four inequalities
in(13)–(14)hold with equality.
Proof. Equation (20) gives ∥C∥ = |sin (ϕ/2)| and ∥G∥ = |cos (ϕ/2)|. The endpoint subspaces have
all canonical angles equal toα. Using (21),
Z
I
trQ=kM 2α
M = 2kα,
Z
I
λmax(Q) =M 2α
M = 2α.
The peak equalities follow because both delay quantities are constant.
Proposition 5.2(Global exact equality).The M points zM = 1are exact pass points and the M
points zM = −1are exact stop points in cyclic alternation. Consequently (18) gives n≥Mk , while
degMcM Sk,M = Mk. The total action and every one of the2 M local trace and proper-delay bounds
are also equalities.
The result is therefore sharp in five independent senses: coefficient in front of M, coefficient in
front of k, dependence on the robust angle, local trace delay and local largest proper delay. No
unknown architecture constant is hidden in the theorem.
6 From scattering data to a certificate
The theorem can be evaluated from boundary-frequency measurements. It does not require pole
fitting, analytic continuation or knowledge of an internal realization.
Suppose only the signal-sector block G(θ) = RAS(θ)J is measured and the full passive model
admits a unitary completion. Let bGsatisfy an operator-norm error bound
( bG(θ)−G(θ))V

op
≤η θ.(22)
At a nominal pass point definegp = σmin( bG(p)V ), and at a nominal stop point definegs =
 bG(s)V

op
.
Weyl’s singular-value perturbation bound and unitarity give certified actual leakages
εcert
p =
q
1−min{1,[g p −η p]+}2, ε cert
s = min{1, gs +η s}.(23)
6

--- Page 7 ---

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
symmetric amplitude error ε
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0certified fraction of Mk
robust global degree law
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
interferometric phase ϕ
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0power
finite-error equality arc
signal power
loss-port power
certified transition
Figure 1: Left: certified fraction of the exact degree law for symmetric amplitude error. Right: an
equality arc of the interferometric family; both delay integrals equal their geometric lower bounds
on the shaded interval.
Indeed C∗C = I−G ∗G on the selected inputs. Substituting the inflated errors into (7) produces a
rigorous lower bound. The certificate remains useful whenever
arcsinε cert
p + arcsinεcert
s < π
2 .
For each adjacent transition the measured angular separation ∆ then adds the peak-delay
certificate (14). Thus separation is not needed to infer a global degree cost, but it decides how
concentrated the unavoidable memory must be. This cleanly separates two experimental questions:
how many switches?−→total degree,how narrow are they?−→peak delay.
7 Implication for passive quantum reservoirs
In a linear passive quantum network, S routes bosonic input fields among output ports while
preserving canonical commutation relations [ 9, 10]. Choose RA as the sector coupled to the
observed system and RB as an auxiliary or loss sector. A rank- k bath subspace routed to A at one
frequency and toBat another changes which environmental directions reach the system.
For a bath spectral matrix JB(ω) with j−I⪯J B ⪯j +I, the weak-coupling contribution through
the signal block is
ΓG(ω) =G(ω)J B(ω)G(ω)∗.(24)
At a pass point with amplitude leakage εp, every selected unit input has signal norm at leastq
1−ε 2p; at a stop point it has signal norm at most εs. Hence the filtered rate scale changes from
at least j−(1 −ε 2
p) to at most j+ε2
s along the selected directions. Repeating this switch M times
forces the memory and delay costs above. The rate statement uses the standard weak-coupling
interface [11]; the scattering theorem itself is independent of a Markov approximation.
This gives a precise operational reading: moving a quantum noise subspace back and forth
across a spectral system–environment boundary cannot be done by a memoryless passive box. The
word “memory” refers to internal dynamical degree and Wigner–Smith dwell time, not directly to
thermodynamic work or Landauer energy. That distinction follows the resource-boundary outlook
of [12] without importing its broader conjectures into the present theorem.
7

--- Page 8 ---

Table 1: Certificate layers. Ratios must not exceed one.
Audit trials/cases worst ratio result
finite-error equality arcs 15 1.000000 equality
exact cyclic families 4 1.000000 equality
positive block, trace norm 2048 0.845291 pass
positive block, operator norm 2048 0.971240 pass
random Potapov paths 512 0.999817 pass
8 Reproducible adversarial audit
The proof is analytic. Numerical experiments are designed to attack its interfaces, not to establish
it. The public artifact contains a generator, a frozen JSON ledger and an independent verifier.
The finite-error suite uses k∈ {1, 2, 4}, orders M∈ {3, 5, 7} and asymmetric as well as symmetric
errors. It checks the endpoint overlap, principal angle, arc width and both integrated delays against
exact closed forms. The cyclic suite checks degree and total action at orders up to seven and rank
four.
The positive-block test draws 2,048 dense complex positive matrices of sizes three through
twelve and random projections of every admissible type. It separately attacks
2∥(I−P)QP∥ 1
trQ ≤1, 2∥(I−P)QP∥ op
λmax(Q) ≤1.
The path test draws 512 matrix inner products with up to twelve independent rank-one Blaschke–
Potapov factors, random subspaces of ranks one through three and independent frequency arcs.
It compares the endpoint trace-angular Grassmann distance with half the adaptively integrated
Wigner–Smith trace. The most adversarial draw reaches 0 .999817 of the bound without crossing it.
The complete replay is:
https://github.com/lluiseriksson/finite-sample-spectral-certificates/tree/
research/robust-spectral-routing
and the principal commands are
python research/routing_speed_limit_certificate.py
python verification/verify_routing_speed_limit.py
python verification/run_routing_speed_limit_release_checks.py
9 Relation to existing bounds and priority boundary
Every ingredient used in the proof has a classical life. Wigner and Smith introduced phase and
lifetime delay [7, 8]; modern multiport formulations connect the matrix to field-energy overlaps
and frequency sensitivity [ 13]. Canonical angles and unitarily invariant Grassmann metrics are
established matrix geometry [ 4, 5]. McMillan degree and rational inner factorization are standard
realization theory [6, 2]. Geometric quantum speed limits provide a useful temporal analogy [14].
Several nearby theories answer different questions. Bode–Fano bounds integrate logarithmic
mismatch against load-dependent pole data and their multiport extensions address broadband
matching [15, 16]. Boundary and tangential interpolation prescribe complex values or angular
derivatives and study solvability or minimal degree [ 17, 18, 19]. Quantum filter functions quantify
noise transfer for specified control protocols [ 20]. None of these results, in the sources audited here,
states the displayed leakage-only chain
approximate routing between orthogonal output sectors
=⇒Grassmann motion =⇒positive Wigner–Smith action
=⇒McMillan degree,
8

--- Page 9 ---

with the sharp constants of Theorems 4.1 and 4.3. This is the specific novelty claim. We do not
claim new Grassmann geometry, a new Wigner–Smith definition, a replacement for Bode–Fano
theory or a complete solution of robust rational interpolation.
The sequence of preceding papers had progressively narrower comparison loopholes. Noncommut-
ing filters supplied an irreducible construction [21]; passive reservoir filtering converted its amplitude
gap into a decoherence-rate gap and exposed a delay price [ 22]; the exact calibration-memory
law replaced a restricted comparator by a universal rational-inner degree bound [ 1]. The present
paper removes the exact-calibration requirement for ordered pass/stop data and extends the action
statement beyond rational networks.
10 Scope, failure modes and open problems
Limitation10.1 (Positive Wigner–Smith class).Arbitrary unitary scattering matrices can have
signed proper delays. The sharp factor two and the degree identity apply to the positive class,
including causal rational inner matrices in the disk convention used here. For signed paths the
absolute-action variant after Theorem 4.3 is the valid statement.
Limitation10.2 (Fixed input subspace).The same rank- k input subspace is tracked along each
certified arc. If the input directions are allowed to change adversarially from sample to sample,
the network need not move a common subspace. A useful extension would add a measured
correspondence or transport cost between changing input frames.
Limitation10.3 (Complementary sectors).The clean angle formula uses RA + RB = I. Additional
unmonitored outputs can be included in either sector. If they are left outside both, their leakage
must be measured and included in a three-sector angle bound.
Limitation10.4 (Degree is not hardware energy).McMillan degree, trace delay and proper delay
quantify dynamical memory. They do not by themselves determine fabrication volume, temperature,
initialization cost or dissipated work. Such conversions require a physical realization model.
The most promising extensions are a measure-valued version for singular inner factors, routing
among more than two sectors through a target-subspace graph, and statistical confidence regions
for experimentally reconstructed operator norms. A second direction is synthesis: characterize all
rational inner matrices attaining the local equalities. The proof shows they must simultaneously
saturate the Grassmann geodesic and both positive-block inequalities, strongly constraining their
Wigner–Smith generator.
11 Conclusion
Approximate spectral routing has a compulsory memory cost. Each transition of a rank- k input
subspace between complementary output sectors covers a robust canonical angle
α=
hπ
2 −arcsinε p −arcsinε s
i
+
,
and positive Wigner–Smith dynamics must spend at least 2 kα of trace action and 2 α of largest-
eigenvalue action on that arc. Disjoint transitions add. Rational inner networks have only 2 πn
total trace action, soMalternating pass/stop pairs force
n≥ 2Mk
π α.
The zero-error law n≥Mk and both local finite-error delay laws are sharp in every rank. The
certificate needs only leakage, ordering and frequency separation measured on the physical boundary.
It therefore closes the gap between exact topological calibration counts and finite-error laboratory
data while preserving an architecture-independent conclusion.
9

--- Page 10 ---

References
[1] Lluis Eriksson. Lossless calibration is stored memory: A topological McMillan-degree and
Wigner–Smith law for passive quantum networks. GitHub release, 2026. Immutable GitHub
release.
[2] V. P. Potapov. The multiplicative structure of J-contractive matrix functions.Trudy
Moskovskogo Matematicheskogo Obshchestva, 4:125–236, 1955. In Russian; English trans-
lation in American Mathematical Society Translations, Series 2, Vol. 15.
[3] Daniel Alpay, Palle Jorgensen, and Izchak Lewkowicz. Characterizations of rectangular
(para)-unitary rational functions.Opuscula Mathematica, 36(6):695–716, 2016.
[4] Li Qiu, Yanxia Zhang, and Chi-Kwong Li. Unitarily invariant metrics on the Grassmann space.
SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 27(2):507–531, 2005.
[5] Alan Edelman, Tom´ as A. Arias, and Steven T. Smith. The geometry of algorithms with
orthogonality constraints.SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 20(2):303–353,
1998.
[6] Brockway McMillan. Introduction to formal realizability theory—i.Bell System Technical
Journal, 31(2):217–279, 1952.
[7] Eugene P. Wigner. Lower limit for the energy derivative of the scattering phase shift.Physical
Review, 98:145–147, 1955.
[8] Felix T. Smith. Lifetime matrix in collision theory.Physical Review, 118:349–356, 1960.
[9] John Gough and Matthew R. James. The series product and its application to quantum
feedforward and feedback networks.IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 54(11):2530–
2544, 2009.
[10] John E. Gough and Guofeng Zhang. On realization theory of quantum linear systems.
Automatica, 59:139–151, 2015.
[11] E. B. Davies. Markovian master equations.Communications in Mathematical Physics, 39:91–
110, 1974.
[12] Lluis Eriksson. The heisenberg cut as a resource boundary: An operational outlook from
coherence maintenance costs.ai.viXra.org, 2512.0064v2, 2026.
[13] Utkarsh R. Patel and Eric Michielssen. Wigner–smith time-delay matrix for electromagnetics:
Theory and phenomenology.IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 69(2):902–917,
2021.
[14] J. Anandan and Y. Aharonov. Geometry of quantum evolution.Physical Review Letters,
65:1697–1700, 1990.
[15] R. M. Fano. Theoretical limitations on the broadband matching of arbitrary impedances.
Journal of the Franklin Institute, 249(1–2):57–83, 139–154, 1950.
[16] Wai-Kai Chen. Mathematical theory of broadband matching of multiport networks.Journal
of the Franklin Institute, 326(5):737–747, 1989.
[17] Joseph A. Ball and Jeongook Kang. Matrix polynomial solutions of tangential Lagrange–
Sylvester interpolation conditions of low McMillan degree.Linear Algebra and its Applications,
137–138:699–746, 1990.
10

--- Page 11 ---

[18] Joseph A. Ball and Vladimir Bolotnikov. The bitangential matrix Nevanlinna–Pick interpolation
problem revisited.Linear Algebra and its Applications, 516:122–188, 2017.
[19] Vladimir Bolotnikov. Boundary interpolation by finite Blaschke products.Complex Analysis
and Operator Theory, 11:1551–1575, 2017.
[20] Pascal Cerfontaine, Tobias Hangleiter, and Hendrik Bluhm. Filter functions for quantum
processes under correlated noise.Physical Review Letters, 127:170403, 2021.
[21] Lluis Eriksson. Irreducible channel mixing and exponential calibration laws for matrix-
polynomial and linear-phase MIMO FIR filters. GitHub release, 2026. Immutable GitHub
release.
[22] Lluis Eriksson. Architecture-dependent decoherence suppression in passive quantum networks.
GitHub release, 2026. Immutable GitHub release.
11
