Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
1
Three-term Weyl operators: central
multiplicities, rank laws, and exact list
decoding
Lluis Eriksson - 5 September 2026.
Results and scope
Write 
 
 and 
 Weyl sparsity 
 counts nonzero
coefficients in this single cyclic basis indexed by 
 A phased Weyl is a Weyl operator
multiplied by a scalar of modulus one. All results refer to this fixed cyclic representation; a
tensor product of prime-dimensional Pauli bases is a different setting.
For any dimension 
 a trinomial 
 reduces to central sectors determined by
 where  is the order of their scalar commutator. If 
 are the two labels and
 every sector contains 
 equivalent cyclic blocks. Each singular
sector contributes nullity exactly 
 When 
 there are at most two singular sectors,
giving the universal bound 
 An example in dimension 36 attains this bound with 
For a noncommuting pair in prime-power dimension, 
 This yields a complete
classification of the ranks of nonzero matrices with at most three Weyl coefficients when
 For 
 the proper coranks are exactly
(A)
For odd 
 they are exactly
(B)
The scalar determinant test and the common multiplicity are explicit, including commuting
supports and arbitrary composite dimensions. The rank lists (A)-(B) use the additional
prime-power arithmetic. No global list of attainable ranks over all composite supports is
claimed.
The operational application concerns one use of all 
 channels 
 pure entangled
probes, arbitrary final positive operator-valued measurements (POVMs), and exact
Schmidt rank. A perfect list decoder reports a set containing the true channel label with
probability one. Let 
 be the reduced density matrices permitting lists of size at most
three, and let 
 minimize the list size over probes of Schmidt rank exactly 
 For
every 
 
(C)
where 
 consists of exactly thirty half-dimensional subspaces defined below. Thus every
rank strictly between 
 and 
 is forbidden for three labels, and every feasible state
below 
 has a flat half-rank spectrum.


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
2
Positive summation changes the answer outside this interval. For every 
 
 three
sparse squares explicitly attain rank 
 Consequently
(D)
In dimension 16, the complete set of ranks admitting at most three labels is therefore
(E)
Every proof needed for these statements is included below. Section 10 distinguishes the
standard representation and factorization tools from their rank and decoding applications
here. Earlier internal versions and their separate screening reports are recorded in the
companion revision notes.
1. Two elementary ingredients
Character multiplicity. Suppose commuting phased Weyl operators generate a label
subgroup 
 of size 
 Every simultaneous character space has dimension 
 in
particular, 
To prove this, choose one simultaneous eigenvector and divide each operator by its
eigenvalue on that vector. This removes the projective multiplication phases and gives an
honest representation 
 of 
 with no nonidentity scalar operators. The character
projectors are
Every nonidentity Weyl operator has trace zero, so 
 for every character. All these
projectors are nonzero and have the stated rank. This is the standard stabilizer/character
averaging argument, reproduced to fix the composite-dimension phase convention.
Circle intersection. If 
 the equation
(1)
has at most two ordered pairs 
 Indeed,  must lie on the unit circle and on
 The second circle has nonzero center 
 so the two circles are distinct and
meet at most twice. Each  determines 
2. A universal central reduction
Let 
 be phased Weyl operators in the fixed cyclic dimension-  representation, with
distinct nonidentity labels 
 Write 
 let  be the order of 
 and put
(2)
Here 
 is allowed. For arbitrary 
 the equal sector multiplicity is
(2a)


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
3
Lemma 1 (central sectors and their multiplicity). The subgroup  is the radical of the
commutator pairing on 
 its labels commute with every label in 
 One has 
The joint eigenvalue pairs 
 of 
 number exactly 
 and each joint space 
 has
dimension 
 In particular 
 in (2a) is a positive integer. On each such space the
pair 
 is the orthogonal direct sum of 
 equivalent -dimensional cyclic pairs.
Proof. A label 
 commutes with both 
 if and only if  divides both 
 This
proves the assertion about 
 If 
 as a label, taking its determinant with  and 
again shows 
 Therefore the relation lattice of the map 
 is contained in 
The quotient 
 has order 
 and 
 proving 
The operators 
 are central and have labels generating 
 Character multiplicity from
Section 1 gives  distinct joint spaces, all of dimension 
 Their eigenvalue pairs are
distinct because the two powers generate this label group after phases are removed.
Fix 
 and an eigenvalue  of 
 on it. The maps 
 
 send its eigenspace
bijectively to the eigenspaces with eigenvalues 
 These are all the possible eigenvalues
because 
 They are distinct, so all have the same dimension 
 and exhaust 
Choose an orthonormal basis 
 in the first eigenspace. For each 
 the vectors
 span an invariant -space. The wraparound map is 
 so these 
spaces carry identical cyclic matrices. Orthogonality follows from unitarity and the
different 
 eigenspaces. If 
 both operators are scalar on the sector and the same
statement means 
 identical one-dimensional pairs. QED.
Theorem 2 (universal trinomial rank rule). Let
No primality assumption on  is needed, and 
 is allowed in the exact formula. On a
central sector 
(3)
The sector contributes nullity 
 if the bracket vanishes and contributes zero otherwise.
Consequently
(4)
Equivalently, the rank problem reduces to commuting central powers:
(4a)
If all three coefficients are nonzero, then
(4b)


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
4
Proof. By Lemma 1 it suffices to calculate one cyclic -dimensional copy. In the 
eigenbasis,  is a cyclic weighted shift, and its  nonzero weights have product 
 For
 the determinant of 
 has exactly the diagonal and full-cycle permutation
terms. They give
Since 
 this is the bracket in (3). A kernel recurrence divides only by  and the
nonzero shift weights. Thus a cyclic copy has nullity at most one, including when some
diagonal entries vanish or 
 The determinant condition makes its nullity exactly one
when singular. Repeating the copy 
 times proves (3)-(4). For 
 the bracket is
 and each copy is one-dimensional, giving the same conclusion directly.
The central matrix in (4a) is scalar on each sector and has nullity 
 there precisely under
the same condition. This proves (4a). When 
 the circle bound of Section 1 applies to
 It permits at most two of the  distinct unit-modulus pairs, proving
(4b). QED.
The cyclic normal form, scalar central characters and root-of-unity determinant identity are
standard Weyl-pair representation machinery. For example, the repeated-eigenvalue cyclic
form appears in Farenick, Ojo and Plosker, Lemma 2.2, primary text. The statement here
evaluates that machinery for a trinomial in the fixed cyclic Weyl basis, identifies its
common multiplicity from the label subgroup, and combines it with the circle count. It is
not a claim of a new classification of Weyl-pair representations.
Degenerate central configurations. If either 
 or 
 is scalar, at most one joint pair
can solve (4) when 
 so the bound improves to 
 The same improvement holds
when  has exponent dividing two. After rephasing, its eigenvalue pairs form a subgroup of
the four sign corners. Two distinct zeros differing in one sign force 
 or 
 zeros
differing in both signs force 
 This covers 
 
 and the noncyclic order-four
center. A cyclic order-four center can have two zeros.
The nonzero constant is essential only for the two-sector bound, not for (3)-(4a). Section 4
exhibits a binomial with six singular sectors. One- and two-term operators are treated
separately in the rank classification below.
The equal multiplicity 
 uses the trace orthogonality of the fixed cyclic Weyl basis. For
arbitrary unitaries satisfying 
 central sectors can have different multiplicities.
The per-sector cyclic calculation still applies, but the single common value in (2a) is not
asserted in that broader setting.
Arithmetic evaluation. If 
 for any integer lifts and 
 then
(4c)
For this optional evaluation, the lattice generated by 
 has index


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
5
The index is the standard gcd of the maximal minors of a rank-two integer generating
matrix. Substituting in (2a) gives 
 Since 
 is coprime to 
 canceling the
common  factors gives (4c). The formula is independent of the chosen lifts. The block
proof above does not depend on this lattice-index evaluation. In particular, collective
primitivity 
 suffices for 
 in any dimension, although it is not
necessary.
Corollary 2.1 (prime-power case). If 
 and 
 then 
 and 
 Thus
every noncommuting genuine Weyl trinomial in prime-power dimension has nullity at most
two. In prime dimension it has at most one, since 
Proof. Write 
 Then the determinant valuation is 
 so 
 is not divisible
by 
 Formula (4c) gives 
An alternative proof avoids the lattice-index formula. Let  be the minimum coordinate
valuation across 
 After swapping labels if necessary, a determinant-one coordinate
change puts 
 and 
 with 
 Such a change follows from a Bezout
identity for the primitive vector 
 it is used only for label arithmetic and needs no
Clifford implementation. The determinant valuation gives 
 and 
The generators 
 reduce to the two axes 
 and 
 after subtracting an
integer multiple of the first. Their orders multiply to 
 Hence 
 and 
The second axis has order one when 
 QED.
The constant two is attained in dimension eight: take 
 
 
 
 These operators anticommute, and the central condition is 
 for the
four eigenvalues of 
 Exactly 
 solve it. Section 4 gives a composite example with
two singular sectors of multiplicity three, attaining the full bound 
3. Complete individual rank classification
Theorem 3. Let 
 
 The ranks of nonzero matrices of Weyl sparsity at most
three are 
 together with 
 for 
 where
(5)
Proof. Right-multiply by the adjoint of one support Weyl and scale a nonzero coefficient to
one. This preserves rank and range, and preserves 
 up to a positive scalar. A one-term
matrix is invertible. A two-term matrix is 
 If the relative label of 
 has order 
 its
eigenvalues are a phase times the 
-th roots of unity, each of multiplicity 
 Thus its
nonzero corank, when singular, is 
 a power of 
A genuine trinomial is 
 with distinct nonidentity labels and 
 If the
relative Weyls do not commute, Corollary 2.1 gives corank one or two when singular. For
 its one block gives corank at most one. All these possibilities are included in (5).
If the relative Weyls commute, let their label group have order 
 The group order is a
power of  dividing 
 and distinct joint characters have distinct pairs of eigenvalues of
 The circle bound gives either one or two zero characters. Their common multiplicity
is 
 Hence the corank is 
 or 
 When 
 the presence of three distinct support


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
6
labels forces 
 both possibilities are powers of two strictly below 
 When  is odd,
they have the form in (5).
For attainment of every 
 use 
 For odd 
 put 
 
 and 
 The
polynomial
has exactly three nonzero Weyl coefficients, since 
 is odd and 
 Its kernel is
the sum of two eigenspaces of 
 giving corank 
 The identity attains full rank. QED.
This is a rank classification, not a complete classification of the kernels or coefficients at
each rank. In the dyadic case it says that allowing one individual third Weyl coefficient
does not create any new rank beyond those already attained by binomials. That conclusion
must not be transferred to a positive sum of several sparse squares; Section 7 gives a
counterexample.
4. Composite multiplicities and a necessary coefficient hypothesis
Proposition 4. The factor 
 in Theorem 2 cannot be discarded. In cyclic dimension 12,
(6)
has Weyl sparsity three, noncommuting relative support, rank nine and nullity three.
Proof. Put 
 Then 
 and 
 Each eigenvalue of 
 has
multiplicity three. Choose a basis of its eigenvalue-one space and apply 
 this
decomposes the twelve-dimensional representation into three identical four-dimensional
cyclic blocks. On each block, the determinant of 
 is 
 For 
 it
vanishes, and the invertible-shift recurrence gives a one-dimensional kernel in each block.
Hence the total nullity is three. QED.
Here 
 
 and 
 Thus (6) is a one-sector instance of the universal formula;
prime-power noncommuting multiplicity one does not extend to all dimensions. The replay
also computes its rank directly over 
The full two-sector bound is attained with multiplicity greater than one. In dimension 36
take
(6a)
These Weyls anticommute. Write 
 which has order six. Then 
 
 
 and 
 The sector condition is 
 Exactly the two primitive sixth
roots of unity solve it, so
(6b)


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
7
Finally, the hypothesis 
 is indispensable for the two-sector bound. In dimension 12, set
 
 and 
 Here 
 
 and 
 while
(6c)
Indeed 
 is an involution with both eigenvalues of multiplicity six. Also 
 so all
six central sectors satisfy the exact condition (4), as required. These examples distinguish
the universal exact rank formula, its genuine-trinomial bound, and the stronger
prime-power specialization.
5. Thirty half-rank squares in every dyadic dimension
For 
 
 define 
 as follows:
• Take either eigenspace of each of the three nonidentity order-two Weyls with labels in
• For every order-four Weyl with label in 
 take the sum of its eigenvalue-  and
eigenvalue-
 spaces, with  modulo four.
Every subspace has dimension 
 The indicated Weyl representatives have fourth power
 The family contains six subspaces of the first type and twenty-four of the second, after
deduplicating inverse order-four generators.
Lemma 5 (low-rank square rigidity). If 
 
 and 
 then
(7)
Conversely, every such projector is proportional to a sparse square with at most three
terms.
Proof. A singular binomial of rank below 
 must have relative label order two; larger
orders give rank at least 
 Such a binomial is proportional, up to a right unitary, to 
for a phased involution 
 Its square is proportional to the corresponding half-rank
projector.
For a genuine trinomial, a noncommuting relative support has rank at least 
 by
Corollary 2.1. For commuting support, a group of order at least eight also gives rank at
least 
 by the two-zero-character bound. Thus the group has order four and exactly two
characters are zeros.
If this group is 
 absorb phases and write the four values as 
 with
 Two zeros differing in just one sign force 
 or 
 two differing in both
signs force the identity coefficient to vanish upon addition. Both are impossible. The group
is therefore cyclic of order four.


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
8
Let  be its generator, with 
 A right multiplication by a power of  makes the three
supported powers 
 The two roots of the resulting quadratic among 
cannot be opposite, since their sum would vanish and remove the middle coefficient. They
are adjacent. The two remaining roots also form an adjacent pair. After a root rotation and
a scalar factor it suffices to consider 
 Its two nonzero values satisfy
This proves (7). Conversely, 
 for the involution spaces. For an adjacent
order-four pair, take the quadratic whose roots are the complementary pair; its square is
 QED.
Lemma 6 (incidence and count). The family 
 has exactly thirty distinct members.
Distinct members intersect in dimension zero or 
 In dimension 8, among the 435
unordered distinct pairs, 207 have zero intersection and 228 have intersection dimension
two. For every 
 precisely 15 pairs have zero intersection and 420 have intersection
dimension 
Proof. An involution projector has Weyl support 
 An adjacent order-four projector
has support 
 with both nonidentity coefficients nonzero. There are twelve
order-four labels, six inverse pairs, and four distinct adjacent projectors per cyclic
subgroup. This proves the count and separation from the six involution projectors.
For two different involution labels, the joint group has order four, so fixing both
eigenvalues gives intersection dimension 
 For equal labels, the spaces are equal or
complementary.
For an involution  and an order-four 
 if the label of  equals that of 
 an adjacent pair
selects one 
 eigenvalue in each square sector. Its intersection with either  sector has
dimension 
 Otherwise 
 has order eight and two allowed joint characters, again
giving 
For two order-four generators 
 in dimension 
 all labels under consideration
commute: their determinants are multiples of 
 hence of 
 Their label group has
order four, eight or sixteen. In the order-four case, distinct adjacent pairs share either zero
or one of the four eigenspaces, each of dimension 
 In the order-eight case, their
nonzero squared labels coincide. Rephase  to make 
 this only permutes its
adjacent-pair family. The eight joint characters satisfy 
 Each adjacent pair selects
one eigenvalue for each square, giving two allowed joint characters and intersection
dimension 
 In the order-sixteen case, all sixteen pairs of fourth roots occur, and
the two adjacent selections permit four pairs, giving 
 Thus disjointness occurs
only for complementary members. Every member has one complement, yielding fifteen
unordered disjoint pairs.
In dimension 8, two such order-four Weyls either commute or anticommute. In the
commuting case their squared labels coincide, and the order-four/eight argument above
applies. In the anticommuting case their squared labels are independent involution labels.
The four central character spaces have dimension two. An adjacent-pair projector selects
one 
 eigenline in each such space, and the other projector selects one  eigenline.


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
9
Anticommuting invertible operators have no common eigenvector, so these lines differ and
the intersection is zero. The six cyclic order-four subgroups form three classes of two
according to their squared label. Generators from different classes anticommute. This adds
 disjoint projector pairs to the fifteen complementary pairs, giving 207.
The remaining 228 pairs intersect in dimension two. QED.
6. Operational reduction and the complete low-rank stratum
For completeness, the needed covariance reduction is recalled with its normalization.
Represent a pure probe by a full-column-rank matrix 
 with 
 and 
Vectorization is 
 A perfect -list decoder exists exactly when
(8)
To see necessity, merge effects reporting the same finite list and spectrally refine into
vectors 
 Their outcome amplitudes are 
 so each 
 has the reported
Weyl support, up to label inversion and phases. POVM normalization gives 
Setting 
 proves (8).
Conversely, positivity implies 
 Set 
 Then 
 and
 Weyl twirling shows that
(9)
sum to 
 For outcome 
 report the translate by  of 
 The trace
orthogonality of Weyls makes its cardinality 
 and it contains every label with
nonzero outcome probability. Thus (8) is a physical achievability criterion, not merely a
support count.
Theorem 7. Equation (C) holds. Six of the thirty states have minimum fixed-probe list size
two; the other twenty-four have minimum fixed-probe list size three.
Proof. Let  satisfy (8) with 
 and 
 Every summand has range
contained in 
 so Lemma 5 applies to every nonzero term. Any two of their
half-dimensional ranges, if contained in this same -space, have intersection dimension at
least 
 Lemma 6 therefore forces them to coincide. Equation (7) and trace
normalization give 
 Conversely every such state has the sparse-square realization
from Lemma 5, and hence a decoder by (9).
For list size two and rank 
 every nonzero sparse summand must itself have rank 
and its relative label must be an involution. The same range argument forces the state to
be one of the first six. All proper-rank probes require at least two labels, because a nonzero
one-sparse matrix is invertible. QED.
The cutoff is strict and optimal for this conclusion: rank 
 already admits two labels, for
instance from a binomial whose relative Weyl has order four.


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
10
7. Positive summation creates a new rank
Theorem 8. For 
 
Construction. Set 
 
 
 and
These are three-term Weyl matrices. Since 
 
 commute and generate a label group
isomorphic to 
 Its sixteen joint character spaces 
 where 
 have
dimension 
Put
(10)
The three kernel conditions are
Their simultaneous solutions are exactly
(11)
Since a positive sum has the intersection of the constituent kernels, 
giving rank 
 Each 
 is eight times a half-rank projector, so
 Thus (10) is normalized and (8) provides a perfect three-label
decoder for any purification of 
More explicitly, if 
 counts the failed conditions in (11), then 
 Among
the sixteen cells, the multiplicities for 
 are 
 respectively. Hence the
nonzero spectrum of  is
(12)
For the lower bound, a proper exact rank  permits two labels if and only if 
 Here is
a proof valid in any cyclic dimension. In a two-sparse factorization (8), positivity forces
every nonzero factor to be singular. Normalize a binomial on the right to 
singularity forces the relative coefficient to have modulus one, so  is a phased Weyl. The
common kernel of the positive squares is the intersection of the fixed spaces of these 's.
Since it is nonzero, a common fixed vector forces their scalar commutators to be trivial and
forbids nonidentity scalar elements in their generated group. Thus they form an honest
commuting representation of a finite label group 
 Character averaging gives
common-kernel dimension 
 proving 
 Conversely, if 
 divides 
 the
binomial 
 has kernel dimension 
 its normalized square supplies a rank-  state by
(8). In the present case 
 does not divide 
 so two labels are impossible. QED.


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
11
This construction is the decisive counterexample to extending (A) to positive sums. Each
individual 
 has rank 
 yet their positive sum has corank 
 which is not a power of
two. It also separates an exact-rank optimization from the rank-budget optimization, which
may use a single sparse factor.
Corollary 8.1. In dimension 16, a probe of exact rank  has some perfect decoder with at
most three labels if and only if
Proof. Theorem 7 excludes all ranks below twelve except eight. Theorem 8 supplies
thirteen. The ranks eight, twelve, fourteen and fifteen are attained by the binomials with
respective coranks eight, four, two and one. The full-rank maximally entangled probe
allows one label. These exhaust the sixteen possible positive ranks. QED.
8. An infinite exact four-label family
Theorem 9. For 
 
Proof. The lower bound is Theorem 7, since 
 For the upper bound, set
 
 and
The four coefficients are nonzero. Indeed the two middle elementary symmetric sums are
 and 
 Exactly three of the eight
eigenspaces of 
 each of dimension 
 are killed. Thus 
 Normalize
 and use (8). Its exact normalization is 
 QED.
The same construction and low-rank obstruction apply uniformly from dimension eight
onward.
9. Exact replay, rejected generalizations and limits
Place the two supplied Python files in the same directory and run:
python quantum_weyl_verify.py
The bounded replay takes about nine seconds after interpreter startup in the recorded
environment. It produces quantum_weyl_certificate.json beside the script and records the
source and companion-checker SHA-256 hashes. It uses integer arithmetic, Gaussian
rationals, cyclotomic integer rings, and exact algebraic number fields. No floating-point
rank threshold is used. The companion composite_matrix_checks.py also runs separately and
produces composite_matrix_certificate.json.


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
12
The certificate checks:
• all 714,096 ordered pairs of distinct nonzero labels in dimensions two through twenty,
including commuting pairs, checking 
 integrality of 
 formula (4c), and the
collectively primitive multiplicity-one implication;
• all 1,948,590 noncommuting ordered label pairs in dimensions
 verifying the prime-power central-group formula by exact
lattice-index arithmetic; for dimensions at most eight it separately enumerates the central
label group;
• the formal cyclic determinant product for nineteen commutator orders, including even
composite orders 
 in integer cyclotomic arithmetic;
• all 54 labelled sparse-square factorizations, all 30 distinct projectors, and all 435 distinct
projector pairs in dimensions eight and sixteen;
• the rank 
 construction by direct exact matrices for 
 including all sixteen
character projectors, their ranks, the complete spectrum and trace normalization;
• the four-term rank 
 construction for 
 including the exact nonzero
coefficients and zero positions;
• seven direct exact composite-dimension matrix cases covering 
 one scalar central
power, the exponent-two center, two singular sectors, multiplicity three, and the
zero-constant negative control. These cases enumerate label groups by closure and
compare the rank of the original matrix with the commuting central polynomial in (4a). The
resulting 
 pairs are 
The finite checks do not quantify over arbitrary coefficients or prove statements for
untested dimensions. Those quantifiers are supplied by Sections 1-8. The determinant
formula avoids division by possibly zero diagonal entries; this is essential in the singular
cases.
The composite checker uses a separate computational method and does not import the
main verifier. Both were written by the constructing agent; computational separation is not
represented as a separate human or agent review. A prior version received separate
internal mathematical screening. Its report and the scope of any subsequent screening are
recorded outside the article, so that the evidence is tied to the precise source version.
Three broader claims are refuted by the exhibited examples: a multiplicity-free
noncommuting nullity bound of two in arbitrary dimension, a two-sector bound when the
constant coefficient vanishes, and a power-of-two corank law for all positive sums of
three-sparse squares in dyadic dimension. The correct general statement is the central
rank formula (4).
No classification of all higher-rank three-list states for arbitrary dyadic dimension is
asserted. In particular, (C) controls ranks strictly below 
 it does not describe the
remaining convex set. Nor is a global list of attainable individual ranks for all composite
supports derived from the universal central formula. Approximate decoding, mixed probes,
and multiple channel uses are outside the scope of the present exact pure-probe results.


Lluis Eriksson | Three-term Weyl rank | ARR v1
13
10. Antecedents and contribution map
Result or tool
Antecedent inspected
Application in this article
Perfect list decoding
and sparse positive
factorizations
Johnston, Lovitz, Russo and Sikora, The
complexity of perfect quantum state
classification, Lemma 9 and Corollary
11, primary full text
Equation (8) gives the Weyl-covariant
normalization. No new general factor-width
equivalence is claimed.
Equal character
multiplicity and
stabilizer dimension
Gheorghiu, Standard Form of Qudit
Stabilizer Groups, Theorem 1, primary
PDF
The trace proof is standard. Lemma 1
evaluates the two-generator central subgroup
in the fixed cyclic Weyl representation for
arbitrary dimension.
Repeated cyclic blocks
for Weyl pairs
Farenick, Ojo and Plosker, Universality
of Weyl Unitaries, Lemmas 2.1-2.2,
primary PDF
The cyclic normal form is standard. Theorem
2 applies it to rank, with the explicit common
multiplicity 
 and the two-circle count;
no new representation classification is
claimed.
Root-of-unity cyclic
representations
Kim, Finite dimensional quantum
Teichmüller space from the quantum
torus at root of unity, Section 2.1,
Propositions 2.5-2.6, primary PDF
Cyclic blocks and central characters are prior
machinery. The paper uses odd root order.
Our even/odd block signs and multiplicity
calculation are proved directly; no even-order
theorem is inferred from its odd-order
convention.
Quantum-binomial
center phenomenon
Fock and Goncharov, Cluster
ensembles, quantization and the
dilogarithm, Section 3.1.1, primary PDF
Background for the familiar root-of-unity
mechanism. The short determinant proof
supplies precisely the identity needed here.
No claim is made to invent quantum-binomial
identities or quantum-torus representations.
Primary-source searches targeted Weyl trinomial rank/nullity, finite Weyl rank uncertainty, finite Gabor
three-vector dependence, and root-of-unity quantum-torus representations, including central multiplicities.
They located the background machinery above but did not locate the specific prime-power rank list (5),
all-dyadic thirty-state stratum, or exact 
 list value. This bounded negative search does not establish
priority. Real-line HRT/Gabor results concern different spaces and quantifiers and were not imported. The
companion quantum_sources.md records the reading scope and limitations.
The two-label divisibility criterion and the dimension-eight endpoint of the thirty-state and four-label results
appeared in earlier internal notes by the same author. Their proofs are included here for self-containment.
The contribution developed in this article is the explicit universal rank reduction and its prime-power
classification, together with the all-dyadic stratum and the 
 positive-sum family. Standard
representation-theoretic ingredients remain credited to their antecedents.
Lluis Eriksson directed the research programme. OpenAI Codex assisted with conjecture screening, proof
development, exact computation, source comparison and drafting. The constructing agent's derivations and
exact checks are distinguished from the separate internal review.
